Generated using the official AMS L ATEX template v6.1
Application of deep learning to the estimation of normalization coefficients
in diffusion-based covariance models
Folke Skrunesa, Mayeul Destouchesb,aAnthony T. Weavera, Guillaume Coulauda, Olivier
Gouxa, Corentin Lapeyrea
aCERFACS / CECI CNRS, UMR 5318 , Toulouse, France,bMet Office, Exeter, United Kingdom
Corresponding author : Mayeul Destouches, mayeul.destouches@metoffice.gov.uk
1arXiv:2312.05068v1  [physics.data-an]  8 Dec 2023
ABSTRACT: Variational data assimilation in ocean models depends on the ability to model
general correlation operators in the presence of coastlines. Grid-point filters based on diffusion
operators are widely used for this purpose, but come with a computational bottleneck – the costly
estimation of normalization factors for every model grid point. In this paper, we show that a simple
convolutional neural network can effectively learn these normalization factors with better accuracy
than the current operational methods. Our network is tested with a two-dimensional diffusion
operator from the NEMOV AR ocean data assimilation system, applied to a global ocean grid with
approximately one degree horizontal resolution. The network is trained on exact normalization
factors estimated by a brute-force method. Knowing that convolutional networks can only model
translation-equivariant functions, we ensure that the normalization estimation problem is indeed
translation-equivariant. Specifically, we show how the number of inputs of this problem can be
reduced while preserving translation equivariance. Adding the distance to the coastline as an
input channel is found to improve the performance of the network around coastlines. Extensions
to three-dimensional diffusion and to higher horizontal resolutions are discussed. Removing the
computational bottleneck associated with normalization opens the way to using adaptive correlation
models for operational ocean data assimilation. The code for this work is publicly available at
https://github.com/FolkeKS/DL-normalization/tree/core-features
2
1. Introduction
Error covariance matrices are essential for determining how different pieces of information
are weighted in a data assimilation (DA) problem. For large problems, such as those typically
encountered in atmospheric and ocean DA applications, it is impossible to represent them as
explicit full-rank matrices. Instead, they must be modeled , either as (localized) reduced-rank
matrices or in terms of parameterized covariance functions that have a tractable number of tunable
parameters and that are computationally efficient when applied as the kernel of a covariance
operator (Bannister 2008). Covariance operators are commonly used in variational DA where only
matrix-vector products are required for the iterative algorithms used to obtain the solution. In
this article, we consider covariance matrices belonging to this latter (operator) class. Specifically,
we focus on covariance operators that can be formulated as a sequence of differential operators
and interpreted as the solution of a diffusion equation (Weaver and Courtier 2001; Mirouze and
Weaver 2010; Weaver and Mirouze 2013). When the diffusion equation is solved implicitly with an
Euler-backward step, diffusion operators represent covariance operators whose smoothing kernels
are from the Mat ´ern class (Guttorp and Gneiting 2006; Lindgren et al. 2011).
Diffusion-based covariance operators are convenient in DA applications involving domains with
complex boundary geometry and requiring inhomogeneous and anisotropic smoothing tensors.
This is the case for background-error covariances in ocean DA (Weaver and Courtier 2001; Weaver
et al. 2020). Specifically, and especially within the context of this article, these operators are needed
to model correlation operators, which, by definition, correspond to covariance matrices whose
diagonal elements (variances) are all equal to one. The symmetric property of the covariance matrix
is maintained by pre- and post-multiplying the diffusion-based correlation matrix by the diagonal
matrix of standard deviations. By factoring the covariance operator this way, the correlations and
variances can be controlled independently.
In order to isolate the correlation operator, diffusion-based covariance matrices must be
normalized by their intrinsic variances. We refer to the diagonal matrix whose elements are
the inverse of the intrinsic variances as the matrix of normalization factors . The normalization
factors act to compensate the attenuation of the covariance amplitude that occurs from a diffusive
process. As with the actual variances, the normalization factors can be applied symmetrically
through pre- and post-multiplication by a diagonal matrix that contains the square root of the
3
normalization factors. The normalization factors have units of length, area or volume depending
on whether the covariance operator is applied in one, two or three dimensions.
Except in idealized or specific cases, for which we can resort to well-known analytical expressions
(Guttorp and Gneiting 2006), the normalization factors are not known to high accuracy at all
grid points. Their values depend on the diffusion model parameters, such as the smoothing
tensor; on the boundary geometry, such as coastlines in an ocean model; on the type of boundary
conditions (Neumann, Dirichlet or mixed); and on the details of the numerical discretization scheme
and computational solver. Regardless of the domain and covariance model details, it is always
possible to diagnose the exact normalization factor at any grid point using brute force, whereby
the covariance matrix is applied to a canonical vector, which has a value of one at the grid point
of interest and a value of zero at all other grid points. However, this method is not practical for
model configurations involving millions of grid points, especially if normalization factors have to
be regularly recomputed, as is required in a cycled DA system when newly available estimates of the
diffusion model parameters are applied on each cycle. A randomization or Monte Carlo method is
much more practical than the brute-force method as it can be used to generate sufficiently accurate
normalization factors for any number of grid points at the cost of several thousand applications of
the diffusion operator. Nevertheless, this is still too costly to be applied routinely ( i.e., on each DA
cycle) to three-dimensional (3D) variables in a real-time operational environment where timeliness
is critical.
Using a diffusion-based covariance model for a global ocean DA system, Weaver et al. (2020)
compared randomization with various other methods for approximating the normalization factors.
Their work showed that none of the other methods is accurate and robust enough to provide a viable
alternative to randomization. As a compromise between allowing for adaptive covariances on the
one hand, and keeping computational costs acceptable on the other, Weaver et al. (2020) proposed
a quasi-adaptive correlation model for 3D variables that relies on splitting the diffusion operator
into a one-dimensional (1D) vertical component and a two-dimensional (2D) horizontal component
(referred to by Weaver et al. (2020) as a 2D ×1D formulation) and only allowing the 1D component
to be adaptive. Furthermore, they proposed a method whereby the normalization factors can be
well approximated by a product of normalization factors computed separately for the 1D and 2D
diffusion-model components. This way, the normalization factors for the adaptive and inexpensive
4
1D component can be estimated “on-the-fly” to a high accuracy using the randomization or even
brute-force method. The normalization factors for the static and expensive 2D component applied
in each model level need to be estimated only once, using the conventional randomization approach.
In this article, we show how 2D normalization factors in the 2D ×1D formulation can be estimated
accurately and cheaply using a machine-learning strategy, thus opening the way for the use of 2D
adaptive correlations.
The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we show how the problem of estimating
normalization factors for the diffusion operator can be transformed to make it suitable for a solution
algorithm based on a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Specific care is taken to ensure that
the function to regress does indeed lie in the class of functions that can be approximated with any
accuracy by CNNs. The method has been applied to a 2D diffusion operator that forms the basis of
a correlation model in a global ocean DA system. Results are presented and discussed in Section 3
where they are compared to those computed with a standard randomization method. A summary
and outlook are given in Section 4.
2. Proposed method
We present here the machine learning approach used to estimate normalization factors for a
diffusion-based covariance operator. For at least two reasons, the natural choice for this problem
is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). First, the data are stored on a structured grid, where
every point has neighboring grid points in all four directions. This makes it very similar to an
image-to-image translation exercise, where CNNs are known to perform well. The structured
nature of the data allows us to use standard CNNs, instead of more general but less efficient Graph
Neural Networks for instance. Second, the normalization problem is essentially local. While
a normalization factor at a given location is, in theory, affected by the diffusion tensor at all
points on the globe, in practice, it is mainly sensitive to the diffusion tensor at points in a small
neighborhood. The impact of distant diffusion tensors decays roughly with the amplitude of the
modeled correlation function. In DA applications, the modeled correlations are approximately
Gaussian, with length scales that are short compared to the domain size. As a result, they decay to
zero quite rapidly and the problem can effectively be considered as local. This makes CNNs with
even relatively small receptive fields good candidates for solving the normalization problem.
5
a. Reducing the dimension of the problem
We now explain how the problem can be simplified by reducing the number of inputs required to
train the network. No accuracy is lost in the process. Our assumption is that reducing the number
of inputs (a.k.a. channels) will make the problem easier to learn for a neural network, and will
reduce the memory cost and execution time of both training and applying the network.
We want to approximate a non-linear function
𝑓:(κ11,κ22,e1𝑣,e2𝑣,e1𝑢,e2𝑢,w,m)→γ (1)
where κ11andκ22are the diagonal elements of the horizontal diffusion tensor, with physical units
of squared length; e1𝑣,e2𝑣,e1𝑢ande2𝑢are scale factors that define the local directional grid lengths
at the𝑣- and𝑢-points indicated in Figure 1; w:=e1𝑇e2𝑇is the grid cell area defined at the cell
center or𝑇-point in Figure 1; mis the land-sea mask, also defined at the 𝑇-point; and γdenotes
the associated normalization factor. Here, we are using conventional notation from the ocean
model NEMO (Nucleus for European Modelling of the Ocean; Madec et al. 2023). All of these
inputs are vectors of the size of the grid, some of them being located in the centers of the cells,
some on the edges. Note that we limit ourselves to the case of diagonal diffusion tensors here,
which implies that the principal directions of anisotropy are assumed to be aligned with the grid
edges. This assumption is currently used in the operational ocean DA systems at ECMWF and
Met Office. The diagonal elements of the tensor, κ11andκ22, are hereafter called diffusivity fields
ordiffusivities . The problem also depends on external parameters that we consider as constant
here. These parameters include the total number of diffusion steps 𝑀and the type of boundary
condition. In our experiments, 𝑀is set to 10 to represent an approximate Gaussian function, and
a Neumann boundary condition is imposed where the normal derivative at coastlines is set to zero.
In the specific context of diffusion, we can simplify the problem by performing a local re-scaling
of the diffusivity fields κ11andκ22. This allows us to account for the land-sea mask and for the
grid structure implicitly. More precisely, problem (1) can be transformed, without approximation,
as:
e𝑓:(α1,α2,w)→γ (2)
6
Fig. 1: The diffusivities κ11andκ22are, respectively, located at a 𝑢-point and𝑣-point on a
staggered Arakawa C-grid. The normalization factors γare located at 𝑇-points. Here, we scale
κ11andκ22by the ratios e2𝑢/e1𝑢ande1𝑣/e2𝑣, respectively.
where we have introduced the scaled diffusivity fields
α1=ϵ𝑢κ22e1𝑣
e2𝑣and α2=ϵ𝑣κ11e2𝑢
e1𝑢,
ϵ𝑢andϵ𝑣being defined from the land-sea mask mand from the boundary condition type, as
explained in Mirouze and Weaver (2010, their section 5.2). This re-formulation is made possible
by noting that the discretized diffusion operator can be expressed in terms of α1,α2andwonly, as
shown by Mirouze and Weaver (2010). In our case, we used (zero) Neumann boundary conditions,
which is equivalent to setting ϵ𝑢(respectively, ϵ𝑣) equal to zero on east-west (respectively, north-
south) coastlines and equal to one elsewhere. Other types of boundary conditions would lead to
different values of the ϵ𝑢andϵ𝑣fields on the coastlines, as detailed in Mirouze and Weaver (2010).
We remark that there is no loss of information through this transformation, as we have
𝑓(κ11,κ22,e1𝑣,e2𝑣,e1𝑢,e2𝑢,w,m)=e𝑓(α1,α2,w). (3)
The problem is thus reduced from eight input fields to three. Importantly, both formulations of the
normalization problem are equivariant to translation, a key property that we will explore further in
the following subsection.
7
b. Equivariance to translation
A fully convolutional neural network represents functions that are equivariant to translation
(Goodfellow et al. 2016, Chapter 9.4). A function 𝑓is equivariant to a spatial translation 𝑇if it
satisfies the following identity:
𝑓(𝑇(x))=𝑇(𝑓(x)), (4)
where xdenotes the inputs of the function, which should match the inputs used by the corresponding
network. As the CNN is itself equivariant to translation by construction, it is intrinsically limited
on how well it can fit a function that does not satisfy this property.
Both formulations (1) and (2) of the normalization problem are equivariant to translation. The
equivariance to translation of formulation (2) is demonstrated in Appendix A1. For the sake
of simplicity, the analysis is restricted to one-dimensional (1D) diffusion, although the same
line of reasoning can be applied to 2D diffusion. The equivariance to translation property is
illustrated numerically in Figure 2. This figure has been obtained using a 2D diffusion model in
Python that closely reproduces the 2D diffusion on the sphere from NEMOV AR but uses a regular
latitude/longitude grid.
It is important to remark that the equivariance to translation property would not be verified if we
neglected to provide the grid information to the neural network, assuming that it could learn them,
as in
𝑓(e1𝑣,e2𝑣,e1𝑢,e2𝑢,w):(κ11,κ22,m)→γ (5)
or𝑓(e1𝑣,e2𝑣,e1𝑢,e2𝑢):(κ11,κ22,m,w)→γ. (6)
In this case, a pure CNN could not fit the function with an arbitrarily small error. In formulation (1),
the grid parameters are needed to preserve equivariance to translation but mostly represent
redundant information, making formulation (2) the more natural choice.
c. Generation of the data set
There are two steps in the generation of the training, validation, and test data sets: 1) design
realistic input diffusivity fields; and 2) compute the associated normalization fields. We use the
8
Fig. 2: Numerical test illustrating the equivariance relation from Equation (4). Panel (a) shows
𝑓(x), where𝑓is defined as in Equation (1) and xcorresponds to random diffusivity fields κ11and
κ22, and the coefficients e1𝑣,e2𝑣,e1𝑢,e2𝑢,wandmare associated with the regular grid used with
this test problem. Panel (b) shows 𝑇(𝑓(x)), panel (c) shows 𝑓(𝑇(x)), and panel (d) shows the
relative difference between (b) and (c) ( i.e.,|1−𝑓(𝑇(x))/𝑇(𝑓(x))|). The relative difference (d) is
equal to zero at machine precision.
so-called ORCA1 configuration of NEMO (Madec et al. 2023), which refers to the standard tri-
polar global grid with approximately one-degree horizontal resolution. All fields are defined in the
surface level of ORCA1 in our 2D diffusion experiments.
For the first step, we generate reference diffusivity fields and add random, spatially-correlated
perturbations to them to produce a set of distinct input samples, with complex spatial variations
similar to those that would be obtained from ensemble methods such as the one used by Weaver
et al. (2020). The reference field is generated following the method described in Mogensen et al.
(2012, their Section 4.6.2 and their Table 2). The reference field is then perturbed by applying a
multiplicative factor defined as a spatially correlated Gaussian random field centered on 1.0 and
with standard deviation 0.15. The correlation model used to define the perturbations is the same
correlation model associated with the reference diffusivity fields. Some additional procedures are
then applied to the perturbed diffusivity fields. First, we reduce the value of a diffusivity field near
coastlines when the geometric mean of the implied directional length-scales at the diffusivity grid
point exceeds the distance to the coastline from that grid point. Second, we increase the value
of a diffusivity when the geometric mean of the implied directional length-scales is less than the
9
geometric mean of the grid scale factors at the diffusivity point. We generate a total of 190 samples,
which differ from each other by the multiplicative noise factor only.
For the second step, we calculate the normalization factors for each of the 190 input samples
using the brute-force method described in Section 1. This method is numerically affordable for a
2D field in our relatively coarse global ocean configuration. However, for a 3D field or with higher
resolution, the method would be extremely expensive and not practical for generating large data
sets. This issue is discussed in the last section of this article.
An example of an input sample of diffusivity fields along with their corresponding true value of
the normalization field is illustrated in Figure 3.
Fig. 3: An example of a sample of randomly-perturbed diffusivity fields κ11andκ22(left and
middle panels) and the associated normalization factors (right panel).
d. Pre-processing of the data
As explained in Section 2a, the diffusivity fields are scaled to reduce the number of inputs
while preserving equivariance to translation. We also observed that adding a distance-to-coast
input channel reduces large errors near coastlines. The results we present here are all obtained
with this additional input channel. The data are then separated into training, validation, and test
sets containing 10, 10 and 170 samples, respectively. We deliberately limited ourselves to 10
input/output training pairs to reflect the increased cost of data generation when considering the
problem in higher dimensions or with higher resolution. Using statistics from the training data
set, each of the four input channels and the output channel are centered with respect to their global
mean and normalized by their standard deviation.
10
Finally, the inputs are extended by periodicity in both the longitudinal and latitudinal directions
by a few grid points. This ensures that no assumptions need to be made by the neural network
near the boundaries of the “image” while keeping the network output at the correct (original)
dimensions. This extension by periodicity accounts for the fact that the input channels are defined
on different points on the staggered grid, as illustrated in Figure 1.
e. Model architecture and training specifications
The final network, inspired by the ResNet of He et al. (2015), consists of Residual Blocks
(ResBlocks) chained together as illustrated in Figure 4. A ResBlock uses skipped connections to
add, or otherwise transfer, the output of one layer to a layer deeper in the network. Our version of
a ResBlock is detailed in Figure 5. The network contains 4 ResBlocks along with a layer for both
the network input and output, totaling 10 convolutional layers and approximately 3 ×105trainable
parameters.
11
Fig. 4: Architecture containing four
ResBlocks along with convolutional layers
for the network input and output, marked
in orange. The first layer consists of 64
filters, each convolving over the 4 input
channels and making the input of a ResBlock
contain 64 feature maps. Inversely, the final
layer consists of only one filter to obtain the
correct output dimension of 292 ×360×1.
Fig. 5: Our implementation of a ResBlock
consists of two 3x3x64 convolutional layers
with 64 filters, each followed by batch
normalization and the application of an
Exponential Linear Unit (ELU) activation
function. The inputs of a block are added to
the output of the second convolutional layer
before applying the activation function.
We use a relative loss function where the continent grid points are masked; i.e., the model is only
penalized for errors on grid points in the ocean:
ℓ=1
𝑁𝑁∑︁
𝑛=0ˆ𝛾2
𝑛−𝛾2
𝑛
𝛾2𝑛2
.
12
where𝛾2
𝑛is the true normalization factor, ˆ 𝛾2
𝑛is the predicted normalization factor, and 𝑁is the
number of ocean grid points.
The model is trained from scratch using Pytorch version 1.11.0 (Paszke et al. 2019) default
weight initialization and the Adam optimizer with default learning rate of 10−3.
The hardware used is an Nvidia Tesla v100 16GB GPU. The best model is selected based on
performance on the validation data set after 3000 epochs, which corresponds to approximately
9 hours of training. This high number of epochs is chosen because we use a small training data set
(less than 20 MB of data), and because we observed a continued increase in accuracy both on the
training and validation data sets as the number of epochs increases.
3. Evaluation of the neural network
The neural network described in the previous section has been evaluated against the randomization
method with a large sample size of 104samples. This sample size is a typical choice for this
application, giving estimates that are considered accurate enough for operational use (Weaver et al.
2020).
a. Error metrics
We define two global error metrics to evaluate and compare different estimation methods.
Following Weaver et al. (2020), we define the relative error 𝜀𝑛for an ocean grid point 𝑛as
𝜀𝑛=ˆ𝛾2
𝑛−𝛾2
𝑛
𝛾2𝑛,
where𝛾2
𝑛is the true factor computed with the brute-force method and ˆ 𝛾2
𝑛is the estimate obtained
using either the randomization method or the CNN.
From this local quantity, we define two global precision measures. The first is the mean absolute
relative error 𝜀, which is defined as
𝜀=1
𝑑𝑑∑︁
𝑙=01
𝑁𝑁∑︁
𝑛=0|𝜀𝑛|,
13
where𝑁is the number of ocean grid points and 𝑑is the number of samples available. For the neural
network evaluation, we present results on the test data set with 𝑑=170. For the randomization
method, we only have 𝑑=1. This is enough to have an accurate estimate, as we know the
randomization errors are “well-behaved” in the sense that the variance estimates are unbiased and
follow a𝜒2distribution.
While we want the estimate to be accurate on average, we also want to control large local errors.
We therefore introduce the mean maximum absolute relative error 𝜀∞:
𝜀∞=1
𝑑𝑑∑︁
𝑙=0max
0≤𝑛≤𝑁|𝜀𝑛|.
Although the neural network is optimized to achieve a small mean square relative error through
the loss function ℓdefined in the previous section, the final network is chosen based on the values
of both𝜀and𝜀∞on the validation data.
b. Results
All neural network results shown in this section are from the test data set. The performance
metrics of the neural network and of a randomization method with 104samples are compared
in Table 1. The neural network consistently beats the randomization method in terms of mean
absolute relative error (approximately 3 times smaller). It has a similar performance in terms of
mean maximum error.
Method 𝜀∞𝜀
Randomization with 104samples 5.91% 1.15%
CNN 4.3% 0.4%
Table 1: Relative errors of the two estimation methods.
To have more information on the distribution of errors, we show the histogram of the relative
errors across all grid points and all test samples in Figure 6. Similarly, Figure 7 shows the maximum
errors of the different test samples.
Figure 6 shows that the neural network is globally unbiased, with errors following a Gaussian-
like distribution centered on zero. A closer look at the distribution of the maximum absolute
14
Fig. 6: Histogram of relative errors across all grid points and all test samples. Each bar has a
width of approximately 0 .53%. The upper and lower bounds are set to ±5%, leaving some extreme
values hidden. These values are highlighted in Figure 7.
Fig. 7: Histogram of the maximum absolute relative error. Each bar has a width of approximately
1.73%. The maximum values are taken from each test sample.
error in Figure 7 reveals an interesting outlier for one test sample, with a maximum error of 0 .32.
After investigation, this error was found to be caused by a single grid point with coastlines on
several edges. In this grid cell, the corresponding input diffusivity field κ11has an abnormally
15
large perturbed value, even after its original value is reduced by the distance-to-the-coast control
procedure outlined in Section 2c. The anomalous scaled diffusivity has a value of 10.2 after the
standardization procedure explained in Section 2d. For comparison, the second largest scaled
diffusivity in the test data set is 8.6, and the largest scaled diffusivity in the training data set is 7.5
(using the same standardization). Importantly, this result highlights the fact that the network can
make large errors for inputs that are too far from the range of values in the training data.
An example of the neural network outputs on a random sample of the test data set is shown
in Figures 8 and 9. There is no visible spatial structure in the errors, except when close to the
Fig. 8: A sample from the test data set showing the true normalization factors and the factors
estimated by the network, together with their relative error.
Fig. 9: Same as Figure 8 but with a zoom over coastal European seas.
coastline. This is evident in Figure 10, which shows the error as a function of the distance to the
coastline. It clearly shows that the error is larger for points within 10 grid points of the coastlines
16
Fig. 10: Mean absolute relative error as a function of the Manhattan distance to the coastline.
These results were obtained from a network with distance-to-coast as an additional input channel.
than for points further away. For points adjacent to a coastline, the error is up to 10 times larger.
This observation motivated the introduction of the distance-to-coast as a fourth input of the neural
network, which was in fact used to produce the results in Figure 10. Although the errors are
still relatively larger in the vicinity of the coastlines, this extra input channel helps maintain the
amplitude of the error below that of the randomization method.
4. Summary and outlook
In this paper, we evaluated the potential of a convolutional neural network (CNN) to estimate
normalization factors for a covariance model based on a diffusion operator. The normalization
factors are required to transform the implied diffusion-based covariance matrix into a covariance
matrix with unit diagonal (i.e., a correlation matrix). We trained a CNN on pairs of 2D diffusivity
fields and the associated exact 2D normalization factors. The data were generated on a global grid
of the NEMO ocean model (Madec et al. 2023) using a 2D diffusion operator from the NEMOV AR
ocean data assimilation system (Mogensen et al. 2012), with randomly perturbed diffusivity fields.
The trained network yields more accurate estimates than those obtained by a randomization method
with 10000 samples, which is the current method of choice for this problem. Although it has not
been quantified in this article, once trained, the CNN runs at a fraction of the computational cost
of randomization.
The use of machine learning for determining normalization factors is being explored
independently at the UK Met Office (James While, personal communication) and at the European
17
Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF; Marcin Chrust and Vincent Chabot,
personal communication), using variations of the approach described in this article. We would
like to highlight three aspects of our work that we believe to be important and relevant for other
machine learning approaches to this problem.
1. When using a CNN for this problem, the input diffusivity fields should be scaled (see
Section 2b) to reduce the number of input channels, while ensuring the problem lies in
the class that can be represented by the network. The appropriate scaling involves the local
grid geometry and the land-sea mask used to account for the boundary conditions at coastlines.
Equivariance to translation can then be obtained by using the scaled diffusivity fields together
with the local grid-cell area elements as input channels.
2. The normalization factors are harder to determine in the vicinity of coastlines, particularly
where the geometry is complex. In practice, adding the distance to the nearest coastline as an
extra input channel to the neural network helps to reduce the estimation error. The distance-
to-coast input channel may become more important if the presence of a coastline outside the
receptive field of the network impacts the normalization factor at a given grid point, which
might occur, for instance, when moving to higher resolution grids.
3. A surprisingly small training data set (10 pairs of 2D fields in our case) is enough to outperform
the randomization method with 10000 samples.
The network presented here is trained on a global ocean grid with coarser resolution than
used operationally at ECMWF and the Met Office. Here, the input and output fields are defined
at 1 degree horizontal resolution compared to the common operational resolutions of 1/4 or
1/12 degree. However, we expect that a CNN with similar structure would perform equally well
at higher resolutions, although the required receptive field of the neural network would possibly
change due to larger diffusivities relative to the increased grid resolution.
In principle, the network could be extended to account for 3D diffusion or 2D ×1D diffusion (see
Section 1) by using 3D convolutional kernels and by taking care to apply the same scaling procedure
to the vertical diffusivities. Within the specific 2D ×1D framework, which is the 3D diffusion
formulation used operationally at ECMWF and the Met Office, the normalization approximation
based on the separable assumption described in Section 1 could be used with the existing 2D
18
convolutional approach to reduce computational costs. While the geometry of the coastlines would
change in each ocean model level, the analytical problem itself would not change, and the approach
we have presented should be able to account for any coastline structure. Including data from
different ocean model levels in the training step would likely improve the accuracy, but would not
be essential.
Even for the 2D diffusion problem, generating a training data set of exact normalization factors
would be prohibitively expensive at 1/4 and 1/12 degree resolutions. Indeed, the cost of a single
application of the diffusion operator scales at least linearly with the number of grid points, and
the brute-force approach requires as many applications as grid points. As a result, the brute-
force approach scales at least quadratically with the number of grid points. Conversely, the
computational cost of the randomization method only increases as the cost of a single application
of the diffusion operator when increasing resolution. The intersection point where the two methods
have comparable costs is found when there are as many grid points as random samples (typically
10000); i.e., for grids even smaller than those considered in this article. Therefore, for high-
resolution grids, the randomization approach seems to be the only viable method to generate a
training data set. From a training point of view, it is unclear whether it is possible to beat the
randomization method by training on data generated by it. It might be possible if the network does
not try to overfit the data but manages to generalize beyond the random error in the training data.
It might also be desirable to train on a larger random sample than is typical, to reduce sampling
error as much as possible.
An alternative or complementary solution would be to train the network on a small selection
of grid points only, for which the associated normalization factors could be estimated with the
brute-force method. These points could be sampled homogeneously in the model domain, or could
be sampled more heavily where the network performs more poorly; i.e., near the coastlines. This
approach could be useful at least for evaluating and testing the network with an accurate data
set. It could also be used to provide refined training of a neural network that is pre-trained with
randomization-generated data.
Estimating normalization factors for a diffusion-based covariance operator is a computationally
expensive operation, but well suited for a machine learning approach. Being able to estimate
these factors accurately and quickly opens opportunities for using adaptive covariance parameters
19
diffusivity fields) in operational ocean data assimilation. In particular, for centers that can
estimate background-error correlations from an ensemble of forecasts, this would allow the use of
correlations-of-the-day in parametric background-error covariance models based on the diffusion
operator. Furthermore, this would enable the application of localization-of-the-day with ensemble-
variational data assimilation (EnVar) schemes that use a diffusion operator for localizing a sample
estimate of the background-error covariance matrix.
Acknowledgments. The authors wish to thank Andrea Piacentini for his help in setting up and
running the NEMOV AR experiments.
Data availability statement. The code for this work is publicly available
at https://github.com/FolkeKS/DL-normalization/tree/core-features
and the associated data set at https://kaggle.com/datasets/
e6e1e745161300b59a7ecf7695f02fedd5ab6f5853067004c127029d15fde68e
APPENDIX
A1. Equivariance to translation of one-dimensional diffusion
As introduced in Section 2b, as fully convolutional networks are equivariant to translation, they
are bound to be inaccurate if used to model a function that is not itself equivariant to translation.
Figure 2 illustrates experimentally that, with the right choice of inputs, the function e𝑓from
Equation (2), is equivariant yo translation. This property can also be demonstrated analytically,
which is the purpose of this appendix.
To lighten notation, we will only consider here the case of 1D diffusion. Consequently, there is
only one input feature ( α) to consider instead of two ( α1andα2):
e𝑓:(α,w)→γ. (A1)
Our goal is to show that
e𝑓(Sα,Sw)=Se𝑓(α,w)=Sγ, (A2)
20
where Sis the matrix associated with 1D translation that periodically shifts elements of a vector
by one position ‘upwards’. For 𝑝,𝑞∈⟦0,𝑛−1⟧, the coefficient[S]𝑝,𝑞on the𝑝-th line and 𝑞-th
column of Sis defined as
[S]𝑝,𝑞= 
1 if𝑝−𝑞=1;
1 if𝑝=𝑛−1 and𝑞=0;
0 otherwise.(A3)
The inverse translation matrix S−1=STperiodically shifts elements of a vector by one position
‘downwards’.
A diffusion operator Dcan be decomposed into a symmetric sequence of sub-operators (see
Equation (4)) from Weaver et al. 2020):
D=
A−1𝑀/2W−1
(A−1)T𝑀/2, (A4)
where Ais the self-adjoint, positive-definite matrix that must be inverted to perform one step of
implicit diffusion, and Wis a diagonal matrix whose diagonal contains the elements of the vector
win Equation (1). These elements correspond to the surface of each grid cell in 2D and the
length of each grid cell in 1D. The matrix Ais self-adjoint with respect to the inner product with
weighting matrix W(Weaver et al. 2020, p4), which implies that the matrix WAis symmetric; i.e.,
self-adjoint with respect to the canonical inner product. In terms of WA, Equation (A4) can then
be rewritten as
D=
(WA)−1W𝑀/2W−1
W(WA)−1𝑀/2. (A5)
We are interested in determining the matrix expression for the ‘translated’ diffusion operator,
denoted𝑠(D), obtained by translating αandw. To do so, we first look for the translated counterparts
ofWandWA, which we denote 𝑠(W)and𝑠(WA), respectively. For any vector vof size𝑛, we
denote by[v]𝑝its𝑝-th element with 𝑝∈⟦0,𝑛−1⟧. We also assume periodic boundary conditions,
which we impose by introducing cyclical indexes such that [v]−1=[v]𝑛−1and[v]𝑛=[v]0.
For any vector x, we have
[Wx]𝑝=[w]𝑝[x]𝑝. (A6)
21
Applying the translation Stowshifts periodically its elements:
[𝑠(W)x]𝑝=[w]𝑝+1[x]𝑝. (A7)
As this relation holds for all 𝑝, we can apply the inverse periodical shift to all indexes:
[𝑠(W)x]𝑝−1=[w]𝑝[x]𝑝−1. (A8)
In matrix form, this system of equations becomes
S−1𝑠(W)x=WS−1x. (A9)
As this equation must hold for any vector x, we have
𝑠(W)=SWS−1. (A10)
The same property can be derived for 𝑠(WA). A direct relation between the elements of the
matrix WA, the scaled diffusivity vector αand the vector of weighting coefficients wcan be
deduced from Equations (76) and (77) of Mirouze and Weaver (2010). In a 1D domain, and with
the notation used in this article, we have
[(WA)x]𝑝= [w]𝑝−[α]𝑝−1−[α]𝑝[x]𝑝−[α]𝑝−1[x]𝑝−1−[α]𝑝[x]𝑝+1, (A11)
for𝑝∈⟦0,𝑛−1⟧. The scaled diffusivity [α]𝑝is equal to𝜅𝑝/𝑒𝑝where𝜅𝑝is the diffusivity on the
edge between the 𝑝-th and(𝑝+1)-th cells, and 𝑒𝑝is the distance between the centres of the 𝑝-th
and(𝑝+1)-th cells. With αandwtranslated by S, Equation (A11) becomes
[𝑠(WA)x]𝑝= [w]𝑝+1−[α]𝑝−[α]𝑝+1[x]𝑝−[α]𝑝[x]𝑝−1−[α]𝑝+1[x]𝑝+1. (A12)
As Equation (A12) holds for all values of 𝑝, we can replace 𝑝by𝑝−1:
[𝑠(WA)x]𝑝−1= [w]𝑝−[α]𝑝−1−[α]𝑝[x]𝑝−1−[α]𝑝−1[x]𝑝−2−[α]𝑝[x]𝑝, (A13)
22
which is equivalent to
[S−1𝑠(WA)x]𝑝= [w]𝑝−[α]𝑝−1−[α]𝑝[S−1x]𝑝−[α]𝑝−1[S−1x]𝑝−1−[α]𝑝[S−1x]𝑝+1.(A14)
In matrix form, this system can be written as
S−1𝑠(WA)x=WAS−1x, (A15)
which leads to
𝑠(WA)=SWAS−1. (A16)
By inserting Equations (A10) and (A16) into Equation (A4), we obtain
𝑠(D)=SDS−1. (A17)
The elements on the diagonal of Dare the square of the inverse of the normalization factors 𝛾:
([γ]𝑝)−2=eT
𝑝De𝑝, (A18)
where e𝑝is a vector whose elements are equal to zero except at position 𝑝where the element is
equal to 1. We can estimate the diagonal elements of 𝑠(D)from the inner product
eT
𝑝𝑠(D)e𝑝=eT
𝑝SDS−1e𝑝
=(S−1e𝑝)TD(S−1e𝑝)
=(e𝑝+1)TDe𝑝+1
=([γ]𝑝+1)−2
=([Sγ]𝑝)−2, (A19)
where we have used the property that Sis orthogonal ( S−1=ST).
23
Equation (A19) shows that applying a translation Sto the input features αandwis equivalent to
applying the same translation to γ, and thus that e𝑓is equivariant to translation:
e𝑓(Sα,Sw)=Se𝑓(α,w)=Sγ. (A20)
The same result can be obtained using the ‘downwards’ translation, S−1=ST, instead of the
‘upwards’ translation, S. By applying either of these translations multiple times, this result can be
extended to any periodic translation. Note that this property does not automatically extend to other
choices of input features. For example, this result would not hold if the cell surfaces wwere not
included in the input features, or if, instead of α, the diffusivity field κwas included without the
scaling factors representing the local grid geometry ( e1𝑣,e2𝑣,e1𝑢ande2𝑢in Section 2a ).
References
Bannister, R. N., 2008: A review of forecast error covariance statistics in atmospheric variational
data assimilation. II: Modelling the forecast error covariance statistics. Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Meteorological Society ,134 (637) , 1971–1996, https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.340.
Goodfellow, I. J., Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, 2016: Deep Learning . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA, http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
Guttorp, P., and T. Gneiting, 2006: Studies in the history of probability and statistics XLIX: On the
Mat´ern correlation family. Biometrika ,93, 989–995, https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/93.4.989.
He, K., X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, 2015: Deep residual learning for image recognition. arXiv,
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385, https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1512.03385.
Lindgren, F., H. Rue, and J. Lindstr ¨om, 2011: An explicit link between Gaussian fields and
Gaussian Markov random fields: the stochastic partial differential equation approach. Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) ,73 (4) , 423–498, https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1467-9868.2011.00777.x.
Madec, G., and Coauthors, 2023: NEMO Ocean Engine Reference Manual. Zenodo, URL https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8167700, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8167700.
24
Mirouze, I., and A. T. Weaver, 2010: Representation of correlation functions in variational
assimilation using an implicit diffusion operator. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological
Society ,136 (651) , 1421–1443, https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.643.
Mogensen, K., M. A. Balmaseda, and A. T. Weaver, 2012: The NEMOV AR ocean data assimilation
system as implemented in the ECMWF ocean analysis for System 4. (668) , 59, https://doi.org/
10.21957/x5y9yrtm, URL https://www.ecmwf.int/node/11174.
Paszke, A., and Coauthors, 2019: Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
deep learning library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
32, Curran Associates, Inc., 8024–8035, URL http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/
9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
Weaver, A., and P. Courtier, 2001: Correlation modelling on the sphere using a generalized
diffusion equation. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society ,127 (575) , 1815–
1846, https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.49712757518.
Weaver, A. T., M. Chrust, B. M ´en´etrier, and A. Piacentini, 2020: An evaluation of methods
for normalizing diffusion-based covariance operators in variational data assimilation. Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.3918.
Weaver, A. T., and I. Mirouze, 2013: On the diffusion equation and its application to isotropic
and anisotropic correlation modelling in variational assimilation. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society ,139 (670) , 242–260, https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.1955.
25
