AI-GOMS: Large AI-Driven Global Ocean
Modeling System
Wei Xiong1†, Yanfei Xiang1†, Hao Wu2, Shuyi Zhou1, Yuze Sun1,
Muyuan Ma1, Xiaomeng Huang1*
1*Department of Earth System Science, Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory for Earth System Modeling, Institute for Global Change
Studies, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.
2School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, China.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hxm@tsinghua.edu.cn;
Contributing authors: xiongw21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
xiangyf22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; wuhao2022@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
zhousy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; syz23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
mamy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Ocean modeling is a powerful tool for simulating the physical, chemical, and bio-
logical processes of the ocean, which is the foundation for marine science research
and operational oceanography. Modern numerical ocean modeling mainly consists
of governing equations and numerical algorithms. Nonlinear instability, computa-
tional expense, low reusability efficiency and high coupling costs have gradually
become the main bottlenecks for the further development of numerical ocean
modeling. Recently, artificial intelligence-based modeling in scientific computing
has shown revolutionary potential for digital twins and scientific simulations,
but the bottlenecks of numerical ocean modeling have not been further solved.
Here, we present AI-GOMS, a large AI-driven global ocean modeling system,
for accurate and efficient global ocean daily prediction. AI-GOMS consists of
a backbone model with the Fourier-based Masked Autoencoder structure for
basic ocean variable prediction and lightweight fine-tuning models incorporat-
ing regional downscaling, wave decoding, and biochemistry coupling modules.
AI-GOMS has achieved the best performance in 30 days of prediction for the
global ocean basic variables with 15 depth layers at 1/4◦spatial resolution.
1arXiv:2308.03152v2  [physics.ao-ph]  10 Aug 2023
Beyond the good performance in statistical metrics, AI-GOMS realizes the sim-
ulation of mesoscale eddies in the Kuroshio region at 1/12◦spatial resolution
and ocean stratification in the tropical Pacific Ocean. AI-GOMS provides a new
backbone-downstream paradigm for Earth system modeling, which makes the
system transferable, scalable and reusable.
Keywords: Ocean Modeling, Deep Learning, AI for Science, Earth System Science
1 Main
Ocean modeling drives oceanography into the era of experimentability and predictabil-
ity. Employing numerical algorithms to solve the governing equations, ocean modeling
enables researchers to simulate and predict ocean dynamics and facilitate qualitative
and quantitative studies of the ocean[1]. With the development of high-performance
computing clusters, more complicated numerical algorithms, parameterization schemes
and data assimilation methods have been deploying in ocean modeling and operational
ocean forecasting systems, which gradually reach accurate global ocean simulation[2].
It seems that traditional numerical ocean modeling have reveal an empirical knowledge
that accurate simulations means higher computational costs. However, it is estimated
that 10 billion times bigger in storage and faster in calculation than the current
supercomputer to solve the primitive equations directly without approximations and
parameterizations for high-fidelity global ocean simulation[3]. With the development
of the observation system and reanalysis technology, a new paradigm to model the
ocean gradually shows its potential. A quiet revolution of ocean modeling is coming.
Abundant and high-quality data drive the booming development of deep learning
models, which have emerged as one of the most highly discussed topics in the world.
Generative artificial intelligence models, including large language models, have started
to exert a profound influence on our daily lives. In the field of Earth science, artifi-
cial intelligence-based modeling has been achieving step-wise achievements and even
being gradually deployed in operational institutions[4–6]. For medium-range weather
prediction, artificial intelligence-based modeling[7–11] has demonstrated that deep
learning models with large parameters can perform comparably to numerical fore-
casting systems beyond the 10-day forecast[11]. These studies prove that large deep
learning models have great potential to learn and model the Earth system dynamics.
Furthermore, they exhibit superior scalability with increasing available data com-
pared to numerical modeling. With much lower computational and temporal budget
of the inference process, larger ensemble members[7], enhanced forecast timeliness and
lower barriers to digital simulations will drive more possibilities for the Earth science
application.
However, it still has two gaps in artificial intelligence-based modeling in Earth sys-
tem science. Firstly, the ocean, as one of the most important components of the Earth
system, has not yet been modeled by the large deep learning model at present. Different
from atmosphere simulation, the ocean is a special system with closed complex geo-
metric boundaries, which means terrain topology constraints should be considered[2].
2
Encoder Module (16 Layers)FourierLayerDecoder Module(8 Layers)
× WeightsFourier LayerFourierLayerFourierLayer
...S, T, U, V( 15 Layers )
...SSH.........
...Light-weight TrainingDownscaling Module Schematic
MergeOcean VariablesOutputDownstream Output
🔐
Frozen parametersLightweight TrainingDownstream InputCoupling Module Schematic
ProjectionRandom MaskPatchify
Initial Conditions
Boundary ConditionsAtmospheric Force, TopologyOcean Variables: T, S, U, V, SSH
a  Backbone Model
Ocean VariablesInputProjectionBackboneFeature  Tensor
🔐
🔐Decoding Module Schematic
Lightweight Fine-tuning Modelb  Downstream Module
Ocean BiochemistryInitial ConditionsCoupling ModelOcean BiochemistryVariables
Backbone Model
DownscalingModelGlobal FeatureLow     Resolution High Resolution 
Backbone Model
Surface Ocean Wave
Ocean Variables
Atmospheric Force TopologyDecodingModel
Ocean BiochemistryInitial ConditionsCoupling ModelOcean BiochemistryVariables
Backbone Model
DownscalingModelGlobal FeatureLow     Resolution High Resolution 
Backbone Model
Fig. 1 Overall Architecture of AI-GOMS. a , Backbone Model of AI-GOMS. Based on the asym-
metric encoder-decoder structure with the random mask strategy, the model supports different length
sequences. The prediction variables of the backbone model include 5 basic ocean variables (sea tem-
perature(T), sea salinity(S), zonal velocity(U), meridional velocity(V) and sea surface height(SSH))
b, Downstream Module of AI-GOMS. Having trained the backbone model and frozen its parameters,
lightweight fine-tune models can be applied to other ocean-related scenarios at a low cost.
Ocean observations exhibit sparsity and an imbalanced distribution, and even large
amounts are missing in the deep ocean[12]. In addition, the eddy-resolving capabil-
ity is a prerequisite for accurate global ocean simulation due to the magnitude of the
Rossby deformation radius in the ocean, which requires finer resolution to resolve the
eddies and their growth and decay in some regions[13]. Secondly, existing studies have
not fully explored the potential of the paradigm of large-scale deep learning models.
These studies have not yet proven their model can handle different downstream appli-
cations well, which means their trained model has not been proven to be transferable
to other related scenarios. Large models that are not reusable in various applications
will not be able to take advantage of their low inference cost. Inspired by the gaps,
we propose a large AI-driven global ocean modeling system named AI-GOMS with a
general framework for three ocean-related downstream tasks. The overall architecture
is shown in Fig.1.
AI-GOMS consists of a backbone model with the Fourier-based Masked Autoen-
coder structure and lightweight fine-tuning models incorporating regional downscaling,
wave decoding, and biochemistry coupling modules. Inspired by the dynamic core of
traditional ocean modeling, the backbone model of AI-GOMS is used to simulate and
predict the basic global ocean physical variables (temperature, salinity, velocity and
sea surface height). It is designed with an asymmetric encoder-decoder structure[14]
with Fourier-based attention blocks[15], which means the sequence lengths of the
3
encoder and decoder can be various. Similar to the common vision transformer struc-
ture, our backbone model employs a patch embedding structure to map the various
forms of physical fields into one-dimensional sequence tokens, which supports multi-
modal fusion[16, 17]. Owning to the design, our model is available for two-dimensional
and three-dimensional regular grid data as well as sparse data as input. Therefore, our
model can be driven by multi-source data, which means it also natively supports data
assimilation at the model level. Due to the asymmetric structure, we use a random
mask strategy to selectively hide some patches of physics variables as input, which can
be motivated to learn more intrinsic features rather than local spatio-temporal inter-
polation, to mitigate overfitting and get better performance in long-term prediction.
For ocean-related downstream tasks, we exemplary present downstream modules to
solve three different scenarios (regional downscaling, wave and biochemistry variables
prediction). It proves that our trained backbone model can be transferred to other
ocean-related scenarios by fine-tuning a simple module with extremely low training
cost, which means users can download our trained backbone model to solve their own
needs at a relatively low cost instead of training a whole model repetitively.
2 Results
2.1 Quantitative result and profile analysis on 30 days of
prediction
We train our backbone model on the HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM)
global reanalysis data, which is the best estimation state for ocean variables with
Global Ocean Data Assimilation Experiment (GODAE)[18]. It is trained on 10 years of
data (from 2000 to 2010), validated on 2011 and tested on 2012. Our model predicts five
ocean variables daily, which include sea temperature, sea salinity, zonal and meridional
stream velocity, with 15 depth layers (0m, 6m, 10m, 20m, 30m, 50m, 70m, 100m, 125m,
150m, 200m, 250m, 300m, 400m, 500m) and sea surface height at a spatial resolution
of 1/4◦. Five atmospheric variables and topography data are introduced as boundary
condition inputs to drive the model, which are from one of the best atmospheric
reanalysis datasets named ERA5[19] and a topology dataset named ETOPO[20]. In
30 days scenario, our model shows strong stability and accuracy.
In Fig. 2, we measure the prediction accuracy of each ocean variable during test-
ing using the latitude-weighted anomaly correlation coefficient (ACC) and compare
AI-GOMS with FourCastNet[7], which is the state-of-the-art open source AI-based
weather forecast model. AI-GOMS achieves better performance for all variables. Espe-
cially, AI-GOMS exhibits strong long-term predicting capability and has achieved
significantly better performances in both ACC and RMSE (Root Mean Square Error).
Beyond the better performance in statistical metrics, our model achieves good per-
formance in the stratification of the ocean. The equatorial Pacific Ocean is an ideal
region for profile analysis due to the presence of various equatorial waves, such as
Rossby waves and Kelvin waves[21]. These movements deeply influence the feedback
processes in air-sea interactions and climatic teleconnection. Therefore, we use the
equatorial Pacific Ocean profile to evaluate our model. AI-GOMS accurately simulates
4
GOAMSFourCastNet
Fig. 2 AI-GOMS achieves the best performance for all variables in 30 days of predic-
tion. Latitude-weighted ACC for AI-GOMS (blue) and FourCastNet (green) averaged over several
predictions in the out-of-sample testing dataset. The colored shaded regions around the ACC curves
denote the region between the first and third quartile values. Here, T0, S0, U0 and V0 indicate the
sea temperature, sea salinity, and the u-component and v-component of stream velocity at the sea
surface, respectively. Similarly, T100, S100, U100, V100, T500 and S500 indicate that the variables
are at 100 or 500 meters of depth. SWH and TCa indicate significant wave height and total chloro-
phyll a concentration.
equatorial sea temperature profiles that are influenced by the Walker Cell and Bjerk-
ness feedback modulation[22]. Mixed layers and thermoclines can also be simulated,
as shown in Fig.3. On the eastern coast of the Pacific Ocean, the rising thermocline
and high chlorophyll concentrations due to upwelling can be simulated.
2.2 Regional downsacling module for resolving mesoscale eddy
For global ocean general circulation models, some special regions, such as Kuroshio
and Gulf Stream, require finer spatial resolution because of their Rossby deformation
radius[13]. Accurate simulation of the pathway of Kuroshio and its extension requires
the model to resolve mesoscale eddies and the fast processes in the ocean, which means
5
Fig. 3 Prediction Result of AI-GOMS Backbone Model. a , The 3-day and 30-day predictions
for main surface variables (sea surface temperature, sea surface salinity, sea surface height and sea
surface velocity). For each case, the initial condition time is 12:00 UTC on 26 January 2012. b, The
30-day prediction sea temperature profile in the equatorial Pacific at 12:00 UTC on 26 December
2012 (left). The 30-day prediction time of sea temperature at the location (0◦,120◦E, right) is 12:00
UTC on 31 March 2012, 12:00 UTC on 29 June 2012, 12:00 UTC on 27 September 2012 and 12:00
UTC on 26 December 2012, respectively.
finer spatial resolution and more stable algorithms[23]. In other words, whether hav-
ing the capability for eddy-resolving marks a watershed for ocean general circulation
models.
Having considered that finer resolution is indispensable in such local regions, our
architecture provides a regional downscaling module to support finer nested grids for
the specific region. We tested the module in the region of Kuroshio and its extensions,
downscaling the region from 1 /4◦to 1/12◦. As Fig.4 shows, AI-GOMS can accurately
6
Fig. 4 Prediction Result of AI-GOMS Downstream Module. a , The 7-day prediction of the
Regional Downscaling Module for sea surface stream velocity at 12:00 UTC on 8 January 2012. b,
The 15-day prediction of the Wave Decoding Module for significant wave height at 12:00 UTC on 16
January 2012. c, The 15-day prediction of the Biochemistry Couple Module for total chlorophyll a
concentration at 12:00 UTC on 15 May 2012.
simulate the stream pathway with a spatial resolution of 1 /12◦. The details of some
mesoscale eddies are also accurately simulated. AI-GOMS can achieve an ACC of over
0.6 in 7 days of stream velocity prediction and over 0.6 in 7 days of sea surface height
prediction in the Kuroshio region. According to the above results, the design of the
downscaling module enables our system to achieve nested grid resolution to meet the
diverse resolution requirements of various ocean regions.
2.3 Wave decoding module for significant wave height
prediction
In operational oceanography, some important ocean prediction variables are derived
from the basic ocean variables. Our architecture attempts to decode the operational
prediction variables from the feature tensor and some closure conditions. Waves, driven
by the wind, are classified into wind waves and swell, which are significant operational
forecast variables. Therefore, we chose significant wave height as the decoding object
variable in our experiments. Having lightweight fine-tuning trained, our architecture
can realize the 30 days significant wave height prediction (Fig.4).
7
2.4 Biochemistry coupling module for biochemical variables
prediction
From the perspective of marine science, the physical and biochemical properties of the
ocean are highly correlated. In numerical ocean models, the physical ocean numerical
model and the biochemical model are coupled using an external coupler to simulate
biochemical variables[24]. Inspired by the design, we used a lightweight fine-tuning
model to fuse the physical variables features and ocean biochemical conditions to
predict 8 ocean biochemical variables (total chlorophyll a concentration, chlorophyte
concentration, diatom concentration, coccolithophores concentration, cyanobacteria
concentration, iron concentration, nitrate concentration and mixed layer depth). As
Fig.4 shows, our lightweight fine-tuning model gets good performance in 30 days of
prediction. Our results show that the predictions of total chlorophyll a concentra-
tion exhibit high values along the eastern Pacific coastline, which corresponds to the
upwelling predicted by the backbone model.
3 Conclusion
In this paper, we design a large AI-driven global ocean modeling system named AI-
GOMS for 30 days of simulation and prediction, which achieves global ocean simulation
at 1/4◦resolution with 15 layers. Our model not only achieves good performance in
statistical metrics (RMSE and ACC), but also demonstrates good physical consistency
in eddy simulations and vertical profiles.
In order to fully leverage the model’s scalability and meet users’ demands beyond
the basic ocean variables, we design the downstream module for various ocean-related
scenarios. We exemplary present three lightweight fine-tuning models (downscal-
ing, decoding, and coupling) and achieve good performance at a lower cost. Our
architecture explores the transferability capabilities of the trained backbone model.
Several future works are needed to further explore additional potential. First,
our architecture supports sparse data as input, which will offer more possibilities for
data assimilation and end-to-end training with sparse observation data. Second, more
transfer learning techniques can be introduced into the architecture to further reduce
fine-tuning costs.
4 Method
4.1 Architecture of AI-GOMS
4.1.1 Backbone Model
The overall structure of the AI-GOMS backbone is shown in Fig.1a, which is mainly
established on the scheme of an asymmetric encoder-decoder and patch embedding-
recovery module. Our model is designed to support multi-source data as input,
including two-dimensional, three-dimensional and sparse data. However, all data needs
to be preprocessed as grid-like data, which means sparse data should be processed
into grid data with masks.
8
In our scenario, two-dimensional topology data, surface and near-surface variables
(1×720×1440) and three-dimensional ocean variables with 15 layers(15 ×720×1440) as
boundary conditions and initial conditions. We stack these variables as the input ten-
sor denoted as X∈RCin×H×W, where Cinconsists of different variables, and the size of
the tensor is 67 ×720×1440. We use the patch embedding module to non-overlapping
patchify the input tensor and get the sequence of tokens X∈R(h×w)×Cembed dim
(with a small patch size p ×p, where p = 8). After the patch embedding mod-
ule, part of the tokens will be truncated randomly by the specific mask strategy and
the remaining tokens, along with a cosine positional encoding, will be encoded by
several 1D-AFNO blocks. Subsequently, the encoded tokens, combined with their id-
ranks, will be decoded and reconstructed by the decoder structure with shallower
1D-AFNO blocks. The decoded sequence of tokens will be mapped to the output
variables Xout∈RCout×H×Wby the patch-recovery module with a two-dimensional
transposed convolution operator.
More detailed explanations of our architecture, flow chart, additional visualizations
of results and experimental logs are provided in Supplementary Information.
4.1.2 Downstream Model
For various downstream tasks, our design adopts the backbone-downstream architec-
ture. Having loaded the trained backbone model, the feature tensor of the backbone
model is denoted by Xf∈RCdecoder dim×h×wis obtained from the input tensor
X∈RCin×H×Wcalculated by the backbone model before the patch-recovery mod-
ule. The input tensor of the downstream module is merged from the feature tensor
of the backbone model Xfand several conditions of the downstream scenario Xdin∈
RCdin×Hd×Wd, where Cdin,HdandWdindicate the number of input conditions and the
size of the longitude and latitude of the downstream scenario, respectively. We exem-
plary design the lightweight fine-tuning model for three downstream tasks. For the
regional downscaling module, we test 8, 16 or 32 Residual Convolution blocks and a
3-fold upscaling ConvTranspose2d layer as the fine-tuning model. For the wave decod-
ing module and biochemistry coupling module, we introduce two additional 1D-AFNO
blocks and a projection layer as the fine-tuning model.
4.2 Data and Training details
4.2.1 Backbone Model
Our backbone model is trained by a publicly available and influential ocean reanalysis
dataset from HYCOM, which mainly consists of 3-hourly of 8 sea surface variables
and 9 ocean standard variables at a latitude and longitude resolution of 1 /12◦×1/12◦
from the sea surface to 5000m depth with 41 vertical layers from 1994 to 2015. The
dataset is the optimal result from numerical simulation and multi-source observation
(satellite and in-situ observation) by 3D-Var algorithm of Navy Coupled Ocean Data
Assimilation (NCODA). In order to train a backbone model for daily prediction, we
preprocessed the dataset and daily dataset at get 1 /4◦×1/4◦spatial resolution, which
contains enough information to resolve the majority of ocean regions. To accurately
predict the thermocline and mixed layer of the ocean, we choose 15 depth layers (0m,
9
Table 1 Backbone Variables
Variable Layer Details
T 15 Sea temperature (◦C)
S 15 Sea Salintiy (PSU)
U 15 Sea stream zonal velocity (ms−1)
V 15 Sea stream meridonal velocity (ms−1)
SSH 1 Sea surface height (m)
U10 1 Wind meridonal velocity 10m from the surface (ms−1)
V10 1 Wind zonal velocity 10m from the surface (ms−1)
T2m 1 Air temperature at 2m from the surface (◦C)
MSL 1 Mean surface level (m)
SP 1 Surface pressure (hPa)
Topology 1 Digital elevation and ocean bathymetry (m)
6m, 10m, 20m, 30m, 50m, 70m, 100m, 125m, 150m, 200m, 250m, 300m, 400m, 500m)
of temperature, salinity, zonal stream velocity and meridional stream velocity.
The goal of our backbone model is to predict the sea surface height (SSH),
temperature, salinity, u-component (zonal) and v-component (meridional) stream
velocity. In order to accurately learn complex dynamic relationships, we choose several
boundary conditions, including the topology variable[20] and five atmospheric forcing
variables[19], as well as the initial conditions of sea surface height and four ocean basic
variables, as input. Although the data contains 3D variables, such as ocean basic vari-
ables, as well as 2D variables, such as sea surface variables, each of the variables is
represented as a 3D shape of C ×720×1440, where C represents the number of lay-
ers. We merge different variables by stacking them in the C dimension. Within each
24-hour period per day, we sample the variables from the dataset at 1200hours. We
divide the dataset into training, validation and out-of-sample testing datasets, where
the training dataset comprises the data from 2000 to 2010, the validation dataset is
from 2011, and the testing dataset includes the data from 2012.
AI-GOMS employs auto-regressive prediction, which means it generates T-step
prediction by iterating from the initial condition. The model predicts the later step
by feeding its own output for the preceding time step combined with boundary condi-
tions, similar to numerical ocean models. We define the input tensor as Xt
iincluding
11 variables. These variables consist of two components: one is from the initial con-
ditions or model output (ocean prediction variables), and the other is from boundary
conditions (atmospheric forcing and topology variables). The output tensor, denoted
asXt
o, includes five variables. Here, trepresents the current time, and therefore, the
next time step of the variables is represented as Xt+1, with a time interval of 1 day.
In the training process of the backbone model, we use the random mask strategy
of gradually decreasing the mask ratio to force the model to learn hidden physics
features behind sparse information. Two-step supervision is used in our training. We
use the cosine learning rate schedule. The training process takes about 34.2 hours of
wall-clock time on four clusters with 16 Nvidia A100 GPUs.
More details about data preprocessing, hyperparameters, training strategies and
computational budget are provided in Supplementary Information.
10
Table 2 Downstream Variables
Variable Resolution Details Task Source
SST 1/12◦Sea surface temperature (◦C) Downscaling HYCOM
SSS 1/12◦Sea surface salintiy (PSU) Downscaling HYCOM
SSU 1/12◦Sea surface stream zonal velocity (ms−1) Downscaling HYCOM
SSV 1/12◦Sea stream meridonal velocity (ms−1) Downscaling HYCOM
SSH 1/12◦Sea surface height (m) Downscaling HYCOM
SWH 1/2◦Significant wave height (m) Decoding ERA5
U10 1/2◦10m wind meridonal velocity (ms−1) Decoding ERA5
V10 1/2◦10m wind zonal velocity (ms−1) Decoding ERA5
Tca 1◦Total chlorophyll a concentration (mg/m3) Coupling NASA
Chl 1◦Chlorophyte concentration (mg/m3) Coupling NASA
Dia 1◦Diatom concentration (mg/m3) Coupling NASA
Coc 1◦Coccolithophores concentration (mg/m3) Coupling NASA
Cya 1◦Cyanobacteria concentration (mg/m3) Coupling NASA
Irn 1◦Iron concentration (nano mole/L) Coupling NASA
Nit 1◦Nitrate concentration (micro mole/L) Coupling NASA
MLD 1◦Mixed layer depth (m) Coupling NASA
4.2.2 Downstream Module
The overall variables related to the three downstream tasks are shown in Table 2. The
dividing method of training, validation and testing datasets is similar to that of the
backbone model. The prediction time interval for all modules is 1 day.
Regional Downscaling Module
We use the HYCOM dataset at a 1/12◦resolution in the Kuroshio region, which ranges
from 124.7◦E to 180◦and 21.28◦N to 45◦N as training label. We combined five low-
resolution Kuroshio variables (sea surface temperature, sea surface salinity, zonal and
meridional surface stream velocity and sea surface height) and the feature tensor of
the backbone model with global information. The size of the condition tensor is 5 ×
120×230 at 1/4◦spatial resolution in time step tand the feature tensor is 512 ×90
×180. Having through the lightweight fine-tuning model, the size of the output tensor
is 5×360×690 in the next time step t+ 1, which achieves 3-times super resolution
from 1/4◦to 1/12◦.
Wave Decoding Module
We use significant height wave dataset as prediction variables in this scenario. Having
considered the mechanics of ocean waves, we set the 10m wind velocity field from the
surface as boundary conditions to drive the model. These variables are all from the
ERA5 dataset[19]. In this scenario, the input variables beside the feature tensor are
combined the initial condition of a significant height wave and the boundary condition
of two components of the 10m wind velocity field from the surface. The size of the
tensor is 3 ×360×720. Our lightweight fine-tuning model maps the wave variables
into a next time step at each iteration. Besides, we use the annual mean sea ice
distribution area as the mask of sea ice.
11
Biochemistry Coupling Module
Our Biochemistry Coupling Module is trained by 8 biochemical variables, which are
from the NASA Ocean Biochemical Model assimilating satellite chlorophyll data[25].
The dataset integrates satellite remote sensing observations and ocean circulation-
biochemical coupled numerical models. We re-grid each of the variables into a global
regular Euclidean grid at 180 ×360 by the bilinear interpolation method[26]. After
the re-gridding process, we combine 8 biochemical variables (total chlorophyll a
concentration, chlorophyte concentration, diatom concentration, coccolithophores con-
centration, cyanobacteria concentration, iron concentration, nitrate concentration and
mixed layer depth) as initial conditions and feature tensors of the backbone model
with physical oceanography information. Through the lightweight fine-tuning model,
8 biochemical variables in the next time step are predicted.
4.3 Statistical Metric
Following the former works[7, 27], we use latitude-weighted RMSE and ACC as sta-
tistical metrics to assess the performance. Land area is not calculated for each metric.
Therefore, we denote ( i, j) as the index of grid coordinates in the ocean grid set Gas
follows.
Latitude Weighting
The latitude weighting L(j) for the latitude at the j-th index is defined as
L(j) =cos(lat( j))
1
NlatPNlat
jcos(lat( j)),
where Nlatis the number of latitude index.
Root mean square error
The root mean square error (RMSE) for the variable cat forecast time step tis defined
as
RMSE( c, t) =s
1
|G|X
i,jL(i)
Xt
pred[c, i, j ]−Xt
true[c, i, j ]2
,
where Xt
pred andXt
truerepresents the value of predicted and true variable cat
coordinates ( i, j).
Anomaly correlation coefficient
The anomalous correlation coefficient (ACC) for the variable cat the forecast time
steptis defined as
ACC( c, t) =P
i,jL(i)˜Xt
pred[c, i, j ]˜Xt
true[c, i, j ]r
P
i,jL(i)
˜Xt
pred[c, i, j ]2P
i,jL(i)
˜Xt
true[c, i, j ]2,
12
where ˜Xt
predrepresents the climatological-mean-subtracted value of the predicted and
true variable cat coordinates ( i, j). The climatological mean is calculated by sampling
HYCOM reanalysis data at 2-year intervals between 2000 and 2010.
13
References
[1] Sonnewald, M., Lguensat, R., Jones, D.C., Dueben, P.D., Brajard, J., Balaji,
V.: Bridging observations, theory and numerical simulation of the ocean using
machine learning. Environmental Research Letters 16(7), 073008 (2021)
[2] Hurlburt, H.E., Chassignet, E.P., Cummings, J.A., Kara, A.B., Metzger, E.J.,
Shriver, J.F., Smedstad, O.M., Wallcraft, A.J., Barron, C.N.: Eddy-resolving
global ocean prediction. Technical report, Naval Research Lab Stennis Space
Center Ms Oceanography Div (2009)
[3] Fox-Kemper, B., Adcroft, A., B¨ oning, C.W., Chassignet, E.P., Curchitser, E.,
Danabasoglu, G., Eden, C., England, M.H., Gerdes, R., Greatbatch, R.J., et al. :
Challenges and prospects in ocean circulation models. Frontiers in Marine Science
6, 65 (2019)
[4] Reichstein, M., Camps-Valls, G., Stevens, B., Jung, M., Denzler, J., Carvalhais,
N., Prabhat, f.: Deep learning and process understanding for data-driven earth
system science. Nature 566(7743), 195–204 (2019)
[5] D¨ uben, P., Modigliani, U., Geer, A., Siemen, S., Pappenberger, F., Bauer, P.,
Brown, A., Palkovic, M., Raoult, B., Wedi, N., et al.: Machine learning at ecmwf:
A roadmap for the next 10 years. ECMWF Technical Memoranda 878(2021)
[6] Aires, F., Weston, P., Rosnay, P., Fairbairn, D.: Statistical approaches to assim-
ilate ascat soil moisture information—i. methodologies and first assessment.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 147(736), 1823–1852
(2021)
[7] Pathak, J., Subramanian, S., Harrington, P., Raja, S., Chattopadhyay, A., Mar-
dani, M., Kurth, T., Hall, D., Li, Z., Azizzadenesheli, K., et al.: Fourcastnet: A
global data-driven high-resolution weather model using adaptive fourier neural
operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11214 (2022)
[8] Bi, K., Xie, L., Zhang, H., Chen, X., Gu, X., Tian, Q.: Pangu-weather: A 3d high-
resolution model for fast and accurate global weather forecast. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.02556 (2022)
[9] Lam, R., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Willson, M., Wirnsberger, P., Fortunato, M.,
Pritzel, A., Ravuri, S., Ewalds, T., Alet, F., Eaton-Rosen, Z., et al.: Graph-
cast: Learning skillful medium-range global weather forecasting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.12794 (2022)
[10] Nguyen, T., Brandstetter, J., Kapoor, A., Gupta, J.K., Grover, A.: Climax:
A foundation model for weather and climate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10343
(2023)
14
[11] Chen, K., Han, T., Gong, J., Bai, L., Ling, F., Luo, J.-J., Chen, X., Ma, L., Zhang,
T., Su, R., et al.: Fengwu: Pushing the skillful global medium-range weather
forecast beyond 10 days lead. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02948 (2023)
[12] Levin, L.A., Bett, B.J., Gates, A.R., Heimbach, P., Howe, B.M., Janssen, F.,
McCurdy, A., Ruhl, H.A., Snelgrove, P., Stocks, K.I., et al. : Global observing
needs in the deep ocean. Frontiers in Marine Science 6, 241 (2019)
[13] Røed, L.P.: Modelling mesoscale features in the ocean. Waves and Nonlinear
Processes in Hydrodynamics, 383–396 (1996)
[14] He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Doll´ ar, P., Girshick, R.: Masked autoencoders
are scalable vision learners. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16000–16009 (2022)
[15] Guibas, J., Mardani, M., Li, Z., Tao, A., Anandkumar, A., Catanzaro, B.:
Adaptive fourier neural operators: Efficient token mixers for transformers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2111.13587 (2021)
[16] Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner,
T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al.: An image is
worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11929 (2020)
[17] Kim, W., Son, B., Kim, I.: Vilt: Vision-and-language transformer without convo-
lution or region supervision. In: International Conference on Machine Learning,
pp. 5583–5594 (2021). PMLR
[18] Chassignet, E.P., Hurlburt, H.E., Smedstad, O.M., Halliwell, G.R., Hogan, P.J.,
Wallcraft, A.J., Baraille, R., Bleck, R.: The hycom (hybrid coordinate ocean
model) data assimilative system. Journal of Marine Systems 65(1-4), 60–83
(2007)
[19] Hersbach, H., Bell, B., Berrisford, P., Hirahara, S., Hor´ anyi, A., Mu˜ noz-Sabater,
J., Nicolas, J., Peubey, C., Radu, R., Schepers, D., et al. : The era5 global reanal-
ysis. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 146(730), 1999–2049
(2020)
[20] Environmental Information, N.N.C.: ETOPO 2022 15 Arc-Second Global Relief
Model. NOAA Boulder, CO, USA (2022)
[21] Yanai, M., Maruyama, T.: Stratospheric wave disturbances propagating over the
equatorial pacific. Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan. Ser. II 44(5),
291–294 (1966)
[22] Bjerknes, J.: Atmospheric teleconnections from the equatorial pacific. Monthly
weather review 97(3), 163–172 (1969)
15
[23] Yankovsky, E., Zanna, L., Smith, K.S.: Influences of mesoscale ocean eddies on
flow vertical structure in a resolution-based model hierarchy. Journal of Advances
in Modeling Earth Systems 14(11), 2022–003203 (2022)
[24] Fennel, K., Mattern, J.P., Doney, S.C., Bopp, L., Moore, A.M., Wang, B., Yu,
L.: Ocean biogeochemical modelling. Nature Reviews Methods Primers 2(1), 76
(2022)
[25] Gregg, W., Rousseaux, C.: Nasa ocean biogeo-chemical model assimilating satel-
lite chlorophyll data global daily vr2017. Goddard Earth Sciences Data and
Information Services Center (GES DISC)[data set], Greenbelt, MD, USA 10
(2017)
[26] Schulzweida, U.: CDO User Guide. Zenodo (2022). https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.7112925
[27] Rasp, S., Dueben, P.D., Scher, S., Weyn, J.A., Mouatadid, S., Thuerey, N.: Weath-
erbench: a benchmark data set for data-driven weather forecasting. Journal of
Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 12(11), 2020–002203 (2020)
16
