manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
On the choice of training data for machine learning of
geostrophic mesoscale turbulence
F. E. Yan1, J. Mak1,2, Y. Wang1,2
1Department of Ocean Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2Center for Ocean Research in Hong Kong and Macau, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Key Points:
•Investigate dependence of convolution neural network’s on choice of training data
for geostrophic turbulence
•Eddy force function used as a way to filter out dynamically inert eddy fluxes
•Models trained on filtered eddy fluxes at least as accurate but more robust than
models trained on the divergence of eddy fluxes
Corresponding author: Fei Er Yan, feyan@connect.ust.hk
Corresponding author: Julian Mak, julian.c.l.mak@googlemail.com
–1–arXiv:2307.00734v1  [physics.ao-ph]  3 Jul 2023
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Abstract
‘Data’ plays a central role in data-driven methods, but is not often the subject of focus
in investigations of machine learning algorithms as applied to Earth System Modeling
related problems. Here we consider the case of eddy-mean interaction in rotating strat-
ified turbulence in the presence of lateral boundaries, a problem of relevance to ocean
modeling, where the eddy fluxes contain dynamically inert rotational components that
are expected to contaminate the learning process. An often utilized choice in the liter-
ature is to learn from the divergence of the eddy fluxes. Here we provide theoretical ar-
guments and numerical evidence that learning from the eddy fluxes with the rotational
component appropriately filtered out results in models with comparable or better skill,
but substantially improved robustness. If we simply want a data-driven model to have
predictive skill then the choice of data choice and/or quality may not be critical, but we
argue it is highly desirable and perhaps even necessary if we want to leverage data-driven
methods to aid in discovering unknown or hidden physical processes within the data it-
self.
Plain Language Summary
Data-drive methods and machine learning are increasingly being utilized in var-
ious problems relating to Earth System Modeling. While there are many works focus-
ing on the machine learning algorithms or the problems themselves, there has been rel-
ative few investigations into the impact of data choice or quality, given the central role
the data plays. We consider here the impact of data choice for a particular problem of
eddy-mean interaction of relevance to ocean modeling, and provide theoretical arguments
and numerical evidence to suggest that one choice (informed by our theoretical under-
standing of the underlying problem) is preferable over a more standard choice utilized
in the literature. While the choice of data choice and/or quality may not be critical if
we simply want a data-driven model to ‘work’, we argue it is highly desirable (possibly
even a necessity) if we want to go beyond having models that just ‘work’, such as lever-
aging data-driven methods to help us in discovering unknown or hidden physical pro-
cesses within the data itself.
1 Introduction
Data-driven methods and machine learning algorithms are increasingly being uti-
lized in problems relating to Earth system and/or climate modeling, and there is no doubt
such methods have a strong potential in greatly enhancing model skill and/or reducing
computation cost in various numerical models. Some examples of usage includes dynam-
ical processes in the atmosphere (e.g., Brenowitz & Bretherton, 2019; Yuval & O’Gorman,
2020; Mooers et al., 2021; Connolly et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023), climate modeling (e.g.,
Besombes et al., 2021; Sonnewald & Lguensat, 2021), see ice prediction (e.g., Bolibar et
al., 2020; Andersson et al., 2021), identification problems in oceanography (e.g., Jones
et al., 2019; Thomas et al., 2021; Sonnewald et al., 2019, 2023), and our primary focus
here, on ocean mesoscale turbulence (e.g., Bolton & Zanna, 2019; Zanna & Bolton, 2021;
Guillaumin & Zanna, 2021). We refer the reader to the works of Reichstein et al. (2019),
Irrgang et al. (2021), Sonnewald et al. (2021) and Camps-Valls et al. (2023) for a more
comprehensive review.
One criticism of some data-driven methods and machine learning algorithms is the
‘black-box’ nature of the resulting models. In general, for a problem with input xand
output y, a focus of data-driven methods is to find some mapping fsuch that f(x) =
y, where fcould be deterministic or probabilistic depending on the algorithm used to
obtain f. The lack of interpretability for fin certain instances brings into question sev-
eral important issues with the use of data-driven methods. The first is robustness and
applicability in different regimes: are the models doing the right things for the ‘right’
–2–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
reasons (or at least not the ‘wrong’ ones)? If for the ‘wrong’ reasons, then it is perfectly
plausible that trained up models can behave erratically when taken outside the trained
regimes and, given the nonlinear and convoluted nature of the model itself, generate sub-
tly wrong results that might be close to impossible to check. The second relates to fur-
ther utilities of the methods themselves: is it possible to use such methods to aid pro-
cess discovery from the data itself? A lack of interpretability would suggest a negative
answer to that question. With that in mind, there has been an increasing focus on phys-
ically constrained and/or interpretable/explainable models (e.g., Zhang & Lin, 2018; Brenowitz
et al., 2020; Zanna & Bolton, 2021; Beucler et al., 2021; Kashinath et al., 2021; Sonnewald
& Lguensat, 2021; Yuval et al., 2021; Barnes et al., 2022; Clare et al., 2022; Lopez-Gomez
et al., 2022; Guan et al., 2023). While the tools and algorithms do exist, this is a fun-
damentally harder problem, since the training step ultimate becomes one of a constrained
optimization problem.
While the algorithms and nature of the resulting model f(e.g. linear vs. nonlin-
ear, generative vs. discriminative, model complexity) are important details, at the very
base level we are really dealing with the problem of data regression . We would thus ex-
pect data choice and/or data quality to critically affect the training, the performance or
the useful information that could be extracted/encoded by the model, but are issues that
have not received much investigation. If we simply want a model that ‘works’ in the sense
of producing a ‘skilled’ prediction in whatever metric we think is relevant, then the is-
sue of data quality and/or content may not be critical, since we are simply looking for
some optimal fit. If on the other hand we are interested in the harder problem of opti-
mal fit with constraints, such as having a model that works for the ‘right’ reasons (e.g.
satisfying physical conservation laws), or using data-driven methods for process discov-
ery (e.g. telling us about the underlying physics of a problem), then one might imagine
the choice and quality of data exposed to the model should be important. Furthermore,
certain data may be more accessible for the machine learning algorithms to extract/predict
features from (e.g. smoothness and/or spatio-temporal scale of data), which has prac-
tical consequences for the optimization procedure at the model training and prediction
step.
To demonstrate that not all choices of data are equal, we consider in this work the
problem of eddy-mean interaction in rotating stratified turbulence in the presence of bound-
aries, a setting that is particularly relevant to ocean modeling and parameterization of
geostrophic mesoscale eddies. The problem relates to the presence of rotational fluxes
(e.g. J. C. Marshall & Shutts, 1981; Fox-Kemper et al., 2003; Maddison et al., 2015), and
we provide some theoretical arguments and evidence on why learning from the eddy force
function , which is one method to deal with the presence of dynamically inert rotational
fluxes, might be preferable to learning from the divergence of the eddy fluxes. We will
largely leverage the experimental procedure of Bolton and Zanna (2019), albeit with im-
portant differences to be detailed. While the present investigation is largely empirical
and relies on input of external knowledge that is somewhat specific to the present prob-
lem, the present work serves to open a discussion into data choice and/or quality, as well
as probing the available information content in data in the general case, possibly in a
more systematic and objective fashion than one performed here.
The technical problem statement relating to rotational fluxes and its plausible im-
pact on data quality for data-driven methods are outlined in §2. In §3 we outline our ex-
perimental procedure, numerical model used and data-driven method. §4 summarizes
the impact of data choice on the skill of the trained models. §5 considers the issue of model
robustness via investigating the models’ skill and their sensitivity to noise in the train-
ing data. We close in §6 and provide outlooks, focusing particularly on further exper-
iments to probe the information content of data being for use in data-driven methods
of relevance to the present eddy-mean interaction problem.
–3–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
2 Rotational fluxes and the eddy force function
2.1 Formulation
For this particular work we consider turbulent motion under the influence of strong
rotation and stratification. Specifically, we consider the Quasi-Geostrophic (QG) limit
(e.g. Vallis, 2006), which is a widely-used and applicable limit for oceanic mesoscale dy-
namics where the motion is geostrophic at leading order. If we consider the standard Reynolds
decomposition with
A=A+A′, A+B=A+B, A′= 0, (1)
where the overbar denotes a mean (with the projection operator assumed to commute
with all relevant derivatives), and a prime denotes a deviation from the mean, the mean
QG Potential Vorticity (PV) equation takes the form
∂q
∂t+∇ ·(uq) =−∇ ·u′q′+Q. (2)
Here, tdenotes the time, ∇denotes the horizontal gradient operator, so that the PV q
is defined as
q=∇2ψ+βy+∂
∂zf0
N2
0∂b
∂z, (3)
where ψis the streamfunction, f=f0+βyis the Coriolis frequency (background value
and leading order meridional variation), N0is the (static) buoyancy frequency related
to the imposed background stratification, b=f0∂ψ/∂z is the buoyancy, u=∇⊥ψ=
(−∂ψ/∂y, ∂ψ/∂x ) is the non-divergent geostrophic velocity, and Qrepresents all forc-
ing and dissipation.
An aim in studies of eddy-mean interaction is to understand the inter-dependence
of the nonlinear eddy flux terms on the right hand side of Eq. (2) and the mean state.
A particular goal with eddy parameterization is to relate the eddy flux term u′q′with
some large-scale mean state, normally as
u′q′∼f(q, . . . ;κ, . . . ), (4)
where fis some mapping between mean states (such as q) and associated parameters
(such as κ) to the eddy fluxes. Once such a relation exists, we take a divergence, from
which we obtain the eddy forcing on the mean. A notable example would be PV diffu-
sion (e.g., Green, 1970; J. C. Marshall, 1981; Rhines & Young, 1982), where we directly
postulate for the form of Fas
u′q′=−κ∇q ⇒ −∇ · u′q′=∇ ·(κ∇q). (5)
We emphasize the ordering of the operations here: we obtain a functional relation be-
tween the mean and eddy fluxes first, then we take a divergence to obtain the eddy forc-
ing (cf. Fickian diffusion closures).
2.2 The issue of rotational fluxes
The form as given in Eq. (4) is suggestive that data-driven approaches would be
useful by either directly regressing/learning for the mapping f, or when a mapping (cf.
parameterization) such as Eq. (5) is given, to learn for the parameters such as κ. How-
ever, there is a subtlety involved here, arising from the fact that it is the divergence of
the eddy fluxes that arises (and is generic beyond the QG system, where the eddy forc-
ing arises from a divergence of the Eliassen–Palm flux tensor, with the eddy fluxes as
the tensor components, e.g. Young, 2012; Maddison & Marshall, 2013). A two-dimensional
vector field such as u′q′can, via a Helmholtz decomposition, be written as
u′q′=∇˜Ψ +ˆez× ∇˜Φ + ˜H, (6)
–4–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
where ˆezis the unit vector pointing in the vertical, and the terms are respectively a di-
vergent (vanishing under a curl), rotational (vanishing under a divergence), and harmonic
component (vanishing under both a curl and divergence). Since the eddy forcing on the
mean appears as a divergence, the rotational (and harmonic) eddy fluxes are dynami-
cally inert, and one might expect that the presence of such dynamically inert fluxes is
going to be detrimental to the regression/learning by data-driven methods. Similar is-
sues arise for example arise in a diagnostic problem for the PV diffusivity κ, where ro-
tational fluxes are known to severely contaminate the calculation (e.g. Fig.1 Mak et al.,
2016).
One way to get around this problem is to perform a Helmholtz decomposition as
above and only perform learning/regression/diagnoses using only the divergent term ∇˜Ψ.
This approach is however complicated by the issue of gauge freedom in the presence of
boundaries (e.g., Fox-Kemper et al., 2003; Maddison et al., 2015; Mak et al., 2016). The
standard Helmholtz decomposition as commonly employed (e.g. in electromagnetism prob-
lems) is unique because we have periodic or rapidly decaying boundary conditions. The
non-uniqueness of the Helmholtz decomposition in the presence of boundaries arises from
the fact that there is generically no inherited natural boundary condition for arbitrary
choices of vector fields (although there may be ones that are physically relevant depend-
ing on the problem), and that the divergent term ∇˜Ψ is unique only up to an arbitrary
rotational gauge.
One possibility might be to utilize the divergence of the eddy flux directly (e.g. ∇·
u′q′). This is somewhat the approach taken for example in the works of Bolton and Zanna
(2019) and Zanna and Bolton (2021), who considers applying data-driven methods to
learn about sub-grid momentum forcing in an ocean relevant model. While they report
positive results from data-driven methods in their work, there are some points that are
worth revisiting, particularly regarding learning from the divergence of the eddy flux.
One issue is the spatial resolution of data itself: the eddy flux data itself is already small-
scale, and now we want its divergence, which is an even finer scale quantity, so there could
be sensitivity of the data to the numerical model resolution itself. Following on from this
point is the issue of robustness . The learning problem here is trying to find a mapping
between very small-scale data and large-scale data (e.g., divergence of eddy flux and say
some function of the streamfunction), and questions arise whether this leads to sensi-
tivity to the training data, or whether such a choice is unnecessarily taxing on the ma-
chine learning algorithms. A final point is more subtle and more speculative, to do with
commutativity , i.e. ordering of operations. Eddy parameterizations are usually formu-
lated as in Eq. (4): we learn a f(. . .) =u′q′, from which we take a divergence of the
learned fto get the eddy forcing. If we are learning from ∇·u′q′, then the ordering is
different, because we are really learning for some ∇ ·u′q′=ˆf(. . .), where we would
hope that ˆf=∇ ·F. There is however no reason to expect such an equality in gen-
eral, since the resulting mappings ForˆFobtained from machine learning algorithms are
nonlinear.
If we are simply interested in something that just ‘works’, then these aforementioned
points may not actually matter. If, on the other hand, we are interested in learning about
the underlying physics via data-driven methods, then it is not clear whether the afore-
mentioned properties (or the lack thereof) become fundamental limitations in the ap-
plicability of the procedure.
2.3 The eddy force function
If we instead consider learning from data at the eddy flux level, then we probably
want to filter out the rotational component in some way, ideally in a unique fashion. While
the statement about the non-uniqueness of the Helmholtz decomposition holds for generic
tracer fluxes in the presence of boundaries, it turns out, for the QG system and for the
–5–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
eddy PV flux, there is in fact a natural boundary condition that is inherited from the
no-normal flow condition (Maddison et al., 2015). The decomposition
u′q′=−∇Ψq
eff+ˆez× ∇Φq
eff+Hq, (7)
where Ψq
effdenotes the eddy force function (note the extra minus sign on the gradient
term compared to Eq. 6), and may be obtained from solving the Poisson equation
∇ ·u′q′=−∇2Ψq
eff(8)
subject to homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions Ψq
eff= 0. Such an object is uniquely
defined (from fixing the gauge freedom via the naturally inherited boundary condition),
and Ψq
effcan be proved to be optimal in the H1
0sense, i.e. −∇Ψq
effis a minimizer in L2,
or that the dynamically active part of the eddy flux encoded by divergent part is as ‘un-
contaminated’ as possible, at least in a simply connected domain (see Appendix A of Mad-
dison et al., 2015). Furthermore, via the linearity assumption of the eddy force function
and boundary condition inheritance (Maddison et al., 2015), we can define an eddy force
function for the components that contribute towards the definition of eddy PV flux: for
example, from the definition of PV given in Eq. (3), we can decompose
u′ζ′=−∇Ψζ
eff+ˆez× ∇Φζ
eff+Hζ, (9)
where ζ=∇2ψis the relative vorticity, giving rise to a relative vorticity or momen-
tum eddy force function Ψζ
eff(related to the Reynolds stress via the Taylor identity, e.g.
Maddison & Marshall, 2013), computed via an analogous Poisson equation to Eq. (8)
also with homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions, and similarly for a buoyancy eddy
force function Ψb
eff. For concreteness, the discussion will focus on the PV eddy force func-
tion Ψq
eff, but we document results from all three contributions in the later sections.
The eddy force functions have been previously demonstrated to be a useful quan-
tity for diagnoses problems (e.g., Mak et al., 2016, in diagnosing eddy diffusivities via
inverse approaches), and we might expect that it would be a useful quantity for data-
driven methods applied to eddy parameterization of rotating stratified turbulence. To
compare with the discussion above, the eddy force function is a larger-scale object, which
might lead to weaker sensitivity during the training phase compared to training on ∇·
u′q′. The gradient of the eddy force function −∇Ψq
effuniquely defines the dynamically
relevant eddy flux, suggesting that −∇Ψq
effwould serve as a better choice of data com-
pared to training on u′q′, since the latter contains dynamically irrelevant data. Addi-
tionally, given parameterizations are more naturally formulated as a relation between
the eddy fluxes and the mean state (cf. Eq. 4), −∇Ψq
effavoids the possible issue with
commutativity mentioned above.
3 Model details
Taking into account the above discussion, we explore here whether the eddy force
function serves as a potentially useful object for machine learning of ocean mesoscale tur-
bulence. For a problem y=f(x), the focus here is principally on the skill of the mod-
elsf, trained on various output data yfor the same inputs x, where skill is to be mea-
sured by various mismatches between ydataandypredict =f(xdata). We detail here a
set of experiments to test and explore the following hypotheses:
1. models trained upon the filtered eddy flux −∇Ψq
effwould be more skillful than ones
trained upon the full eddy flux u′q′,
2. models trained upon the filtered eddy flux −∇Ψq
effwould possibly be compara-
ble in skill to ones trained upon the divergence of the eddy flux ∇·u′q′, but the
latter models might be more sensitive to data quality.
–6–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
The experimental approach will largely mirror that of Bolton and Zanna (2019).
However, one important fundamental difference of our work is the choice of average, which
impacts the definition of eddies from Eq. (1). Where Bolton and Zanna (2019) take a
low-pass spatial filter as the projection operator, here we employ a time-average and has
the property that A′= 0 in line with properties of a Reynolds opeartor. Our eddy forc-
ing then is in the more familiar form of a nonlinear eddy flux (e.g. ∇·u′q′), rather than
as a difference between the spatially averaged quantities (e.g., S=∇ ·(uq)−∇·(uq),
Eq. 7 of Bolton & Zanna, 2019). The current definition of the eddy force function Ψq
eff
assumes a Reynolds average (Maddison et al., 2015), and while there are likely exten-
sions and relaxation of assumptions possible, for simplicity we do not pursue this avenue
and utilize time-averaging.
3.1 Numerical ocean model setup
The physical setup we consider is essentially the same three-layer QG square dou-
ble gyre configuration as Bolton and Zanna (2019) (cf. Berloff, 2005; Karabasov et al.,
2009; D. P. Marshall et al., 2012; Mak et al., 2016), but solved with a pseudo-spectral
method instead of using the finite difference CABARET scheme of Karabasov et al. (2009).
The numerical model ( qgm2) generating the data presented in this work utilizes the pa-
rameters detailed in Mak et al. (2016), with the stratification parameters chosen such
that the first and second Rossby deformation radii are 32 .2 and 18 .9 km, with a hori-
zontal grid spacing of ∆ x= ∆y= 7.5 km (which is 512 by 512 in horizontal grid points),
a horizontal viscosity value of ν= 50 m2s−1, and a time-step of ∆ t= 30 mins. A wind
forcing with peak wind stress of τ0= 0.8 N m−2is used (correcting a typo in Table 1
of Mak et al., 2016). The model is spun up from rest for 20,000 days, and a further in-
tegration period of 5,000 days after this spin up is performed for computing time-averages.
The accumulated time-averages of the eddy fluxes are used to compute the eddy
force function Ψ effvia solving the Poisson equation in Eq. (8) with homogeneous Dirich-
let boundary conditions, performed per layer. For this procedure, we leverage the FEn-
iCS software (Logg & Wells, 2010; Logg et al., 2012; Alnæs et al., 2014) following the
previous works of Maddison et al. (2015) and Mak et al. (2016), making use of the high
level abstraction, automatic code generation capabilities and the numerous inbuilt solvers
that are particularly suited to elliptic equations we have here. The data from each grid
point of the numerical model are the nodal values on a regular structured triangular mesh,
with a projection onto a piecewise linear basis (CG1). All derivative operations are per-
formed on the finite element mesh, and the nodal values of the relevant fields are restruc-
tured into arrays for feeding into the machine learning algorithms.
Fig. 1 shows some sample output data in the surface layer. The two horizontal com-
ponents of the time-averaged eddy PV fluxes in panels ( b, c) are the datasets returned
by the numerical model, which is sampled onto a finite element mesh as a vector object.
The resulting object’s divergence can then be computed, and the result is given in panel
(a). As expected, the divergence of the eddy PV flux has more smaller-scale fluctuations
and is less smooth than the eddy PV fluxes. Solving the relevant Poisson equation in FEn-
iCS, the PV eddy force function Ψq
effis shown in panel ( d). From Maddison et al. (2015),
the gradient of the eddy force function ∇Ψq
effhas a physical interpretation when con-
sidered together with the time-mean streamfunction ψ(not shown, but see Maddison
et al., 2015), interpreted as whether eddies are accelerating the mean-flow (if ∇Ψq
eff·∇ψ >
0, interpreted as an input of energy into the mean by eddies) or decelerating the mean
flow (if ∇Ψq
eff· ∇ψ < 0, interpreted as an extraction of energy from the mean by ed-
dies). Here, the eddy force function can be shown to correspond to the regimes where
the eddies are slowing down the mean-flow via baroclinic instability when the Western
Boundary Current first separates (the first positive-negative pattern emanating from the
western boundary, which is anti-correlated with ∇ψ), while the next dipole pattern (the
first negative-positive patterns, which is correlated with ∇ψ) is an eddy forcing of the
–7–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
019203840y (km)(a) ∇·u/primeq/prime
8
4
08
41e6
(b) u/primeq/prime
4
2
04
2
(c) v/primeq/prime
4
2
04
2
0 1920 3840
x (km)019203840y (km)(d) Ψq
eff
8
4
08
41e4
0 1920 3840(e) (−∇Ψq
eff)x
0.4
0.2
0.00.4
0.2
0 1920 3840(f) (−∇Ψq
eff)y
0.4
0.2
0.00.4
0.2
Figure 1. (a) The divergence of the eddy PV flux (units of s−2), calculated from the
diagnosed time-averaged ( b) zonal and ( c) meridional component of the PV fluxes (units of
m s−2). (d) The associated eddy force function Ψq
eff(units of m2s−2) calculated from the data
shown in panel a, and the ( e) zonal and ( f) meridional component of −∇Ψq
eff, the associated
eddy PV fluxes with the dynamically inert rotational component removed (units of m s−2). Note
the different choices of colorbar limits between the data range in panels ( b, c) and ( e, f).
mean-flow corresponding to an eddy driven regime (cf. Waterman & Jayne, 2011; Wa-
terman & Hoskins, 2013).
From this Ψq
eff, the horizontal components of the gradient leads to the eddy PV fluxes
with the rotational component removed, and are shown in panels ( e, f). While not ob-
vious at first sight, the divergence of the full eddy PV flux (panels b, c) and the diver-
gence of the filtered eddy PV flux (panels e, f) are both equal to ∇·u′q′(panel a) up
to numerical solver errors (here at least four orders of magnitude smaller than the data).
In this instance, note also that the filtered eddy flux has qualitatively different spatial
patterns to the full eddy flux, and that the filtered eddy flux is around an order of mag-
nitude smaller than the full eddy fluxes. The behavior is consistent with observations
that the rotational eddy fluxes can be large (e.g. Griesel et al., 2009), and suggests we
probably do want to filter the dynamically inert component out should we utilize eddy
flux data to learn about geostrophic turbulence.
3.2 Model training procedure
Following Bolton and Zanna (2019) we employ Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs;
e.g.,§9, Goodfellow et al., 2016) to map between the specified inputs and targets. In line
with the intended investigation, the choice of parameters for training the CNNs are kept
fixed and chosen as in Bolton and Zanna (2019), and the main quantity we vary is the
choice of output data. The mappings that are returned as a CNN are denoted:
•fq
div(. . .), with output data as the divergence of the eddy PV flux ∇ ·u′q′,
•fq
full(. . .), with output target data as the full eddy PV flux u′q′,
•fq
eff(. . .), with output data as the dynamically active eddy PV flux as defined through
a gradient of the PV eddy force function (cf. Eq. 8) −∇Ψq
eff.
–8–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Figure 2. Model training strategy demonstrated here with a snapshot of the instantaneous
PV from model output. The domain is partitioned into small square regions of size 40 by 40
pixels, overlapping in the xandydirection by 6 pixels, resulting in 6400 entries of input and
output data. Each pair of input and output data is assigned with equal probability to be in
the training set and validation set at the 80:20 ratio, from which a trained model results. An
ensemble of models with 20 members is created, and are tested according to the procedure
detailed in text.
Note that fq
div(. . .) predicts a scalar field, while the fq
full/eff(. . .) returns a vector field.
A possible choice could be to train a model from the eddy force function, and from the
trained model’s predicted eddy force function compute its Laplacian to obtain the di-
vergence of the eddy flux. As mentioned above, this is an extremely difficult test for model
skill since gradient operations amplify mismatches, and we comment on related results
and observations are in the conclusions section.
To train up these mappings in the present time-averaged case, we follow the schematic
given in Fig. 2, partially inspired by the approach of Bolton and Zanna (2019). The model
domain is partitioned into small overlapping boxes. The input and output data associ-
ated with each of these boxes are paired up, and the pairs are each assigned a number
and randomly shuffled (i.e. sampling from a uniform probability distribution function)
depending on a choice of a random seed, and subsequently assigned to the training set
(for training up the model) and validation (for tuning the hyperparameters in order to
minimize a specified loss function) set with a 80:20 ratio. A model is trained up, and the
skill of the model is its ability to be able to predict the global field. In the 512 by 512
pixel domain, we take the small boxes to be 40 by 40 pixels, with a stride of six, result-
ing in a collection of 802= 6400 images of the domain. For statistical significance, an
ensemble of 20 such models were trained up, each ensemble member only differing in the
choice of the random seed, and the same sets of random seeds are used for the ensem-
bles to be compared against. The CNNs are built using the PyTorch platform (Paszke
et al., 2019), where the CNN architecture consists of three hidden convolutional layers
with square kernels (of size 8, 4 and 4 respectively), with a two-dimension max pooling
layer with square kernel of size 2, and a fully-connected linear activation layer as the out-
put. The CNNs are trained with a batch size of 64, using the Adam optimizer (Kingma
& Ba, 2015) with a mean squared error loss function. An early stopping criterion is used
to monitor the loss function during the training to avoid over-fitting; for simplification,
we use a constant learning rate of 10−4during training.
–9–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
4 Model skill
We first evaluate the predictive skill of the various models to the choice of target
data. The skill of the models are judged by its ability to reduce mismatches of the di-
vergence of the eddy PV flux, via repeated predictions of smaller patches (here taken with
a stride of 2 pixels), with averages taken as necessary. Note that while fq
div(. . .) already
predicts the divergence of the eddy PV flux, we will take a divergence of the outcome
offq
full/eff(. . .) to give the predicted divergence of the eddy PV flux. The normalized mis-
match between data and prediction will be judged as
ϵq
L2(Fq
(·)) =∥∇ ·u′q′−Fq
(·)(. . .)∥2
L2
∥∇ ·u′q′∥2
L2, (10)
where Fq
(·)denotes the divergence of the eddy PV flux from the models fq
(·)(. . .), and the
L2norm is defined as
∥g∥2
L2=Z
Ag2dA (11)
for some scalar field g. Each ensemble member will make a set of predictions with an as-
sociated mismatch, and the associated averages and standard deviations computed to
gauge model skill.
We note that the test for skill chosen here is inherently harder and biased against
the models trained on the eddy PV fluxes (filtered or otherwise), since an extra diver-
gence operation is required in computing the mismatches. The above choice to compare
the divergence of the eddy PV flux was taken noting that we want a quantity that is com-
parable across the three sets of models, and there is a theoretical issue in comparing quan-
tities at the eddy PV flux level (since that requires integrating the prediction of Fq
div(. . .),
which is then subject to a choice of boundary condition). One could argue whether it
is the L2mismatches we are ultimately interested in, since we may for example be in-
terested in the patterns of the forcing, rather than the exact locations of the forcing. As
a compromise, we consider the Sobolev semi-norms (e.g. Thiffeault, 2012) given by
∥g∥2
˙Hp=Z
A|(−∇2)pg|2dA=X
k2+l2̸=0(k2+l2)p|ˆgk,l|2, (12)
where ˆ gk,lare the Fourier coefficients of g, (k, l) are the respective wavenumbers, and
the link between integral and sum follows from Parseval’s theorem (e.g. if p= 0 then
it is the L2norm above when the k=l= 0 mode is included). Sobolev semi-norms
with negative pwill weigh the lower wavenumbers (i.e. the larger-scale patterns) more,
and in this instance a lower normalized mismatch
ϵq
˙Hp(Fq
(·)) =∥∇ ·u′q′−Fq
(·)(. . .)∥2
˙Hp
∥∇ ·u′q′∥2
˙Hp(13)
indicates that the mismatches at the large-scales are smaller. Since we are dealing with
finite approximations so that k2+l2<∞, we can perform the computation, although
the formal definition for the ˙Hpsemi-norms is generally for fields with zero mean and
on a periodic domain and such that the infinite sum converges. For the work here we
will focus on the case of p=−1/2, sometimes referred to as the mix-norm (e.g. Thif-
feault, 2012); conclusions below are qualitatiely the same if p=−1 orp=−2 were
chosen (not shown).
4.1 Models trained on eddy PV fluxes
We first focus on models trained up on the data based on the eddy PV flux u′q′
with the time-mean streamfunction ψas the input. Fig. 3 shows the predicted divergence
of the eddy PV flux Fq
div/full/eff(ψ) as an output from one of the model ensemble mem-
bers. Compared to the target given in Fig. 1( a), the predictions are more smooth with
–10–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
0 1920 3840
x (km)019203840y (km)(a) Fq
div(ψ)
0 1920 3840(b) Fq
full(ψ)
0 1920 3840(c) Fq
eff(ψ)
8
4
0481e6
Figure 3. Prediction of the divergence of eddy PV flux (units of m2s−2) from one of the
ensemble member of models. ( a)Fq
div(ψ), (b)Fq
full(ψ), (c)Fq
eff(ψ). The target reference data
shown in Fig. 1 a.
fewer small-scale features, arising from a combination of the fact that CNNs were used,
and that our prediction step leads to some averaging of the overlaping regions. Visually,
the predictions Fq
div(ψ) and Fq
eff(ψ) are almost indistinguishable (the latter having a slightly
stronger signal downstream of the Western Boundary Current). On the other hand, the
prediction Fq
full(ψ) shows more fluctuation features than the other two cases. The larger
amount of small-scale features in Fq
full(ψ) likely arises because the model is predicting
the eddy PV flux first, before taking a numerical divergence of the data, so any small
fluctuations that arise from the prediction is amplified by the divergence operation. In
that regard, the fact that the prediction Fq
eff(ψ) is so similar to Fq
div(ψ) is rather remark-
able.
Fig. 4 shows the more quantitative measure of computing various mismatches in
theL2norm and the ˙H−1/2semi-norm given in Eq. (11) and (12) respectively. The re-
sults show that the models trained upon the filtered eddy PV flux −∇Ψq
effoutperforms
the models trained upon the full eddy PV flux u′q′, and have a comparable or even bet-
ter performance compared to the models trained up on the divergence of the eddy PV
flux∇ ·u′q′. The differences in skill are visually obvious between the models trained
on the full eddy flux u′q′and the filtered eddy flux −∇Ψq
eff. The difference between the
models trained from the filtered eddy flux −∇Ψq
effand the divergence of the eddy flux
∇·u′q′, while notable in the ˙H−1/2measure, is too close to call in the L2measure (e.g.
we do not have p <0.05 using the Student’s t-test (Student, 1908) under the null hy-
pothesis that the means of Fq
div(ψ) and Fq
eff(ψ) are the same).
The results here lend support to our expectation that the presence of rotational
fluxes contaminate and degrade the accuracy of a trained up model, and that the eddy
force function provides an viable alternative for use in machine learning approaches that
addresses the problem of dynamically inert rotational fluxes, leading to at least compa-
rable performance from a skill point of view (and some evidence to suggest it might be
better, although that is dependent on the choice of metric). The observation that Fq
eff(ψ)
is comparable to Fq
div(ψ) is all the more remarkable when we note that tests based on
the models’ ability in reproducing the divergence of the eddy flux is intrinsically harder
and biased against models trained on −∇Ψq
eff, since an additional divergence operation
that is expected to amplify errors is required to produce Fq
eff(ψ).
4.2 Other choice of eddy fluxes and inputs
By the linearity assumption in deriving the eddy force function and the definition
of PV, analogous eddy force functions for momentum and buoyancy may be defined by
–11–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Fq
div(ψ) Fq
full(ψ) Fq
eff(ψ)0.00.20.40.60.81.0/epsilon1q
L2(a) L2
Fq
div(ψ) Fq
full(ψ) Fq
eff(ψ)0.00.20.40.60.81.0/epsilon1q
H1/2(b) ˙H−1/2
Figure 4. Ensemble average and quartiles of the mismatch as measured by the normalized ( a)
L2norm ( b)˙H−1/2semi-norm, given by Eq. (10) and (13) respectively, for the models predicting
the divergence of the eddy PV flux (Fig. 1 a). Blue denotes models trained on the divergence of
the eddy fluxes, orange denotes models trained on the full eddy fluxes, and green denotes models
trained on the filtered eddy fluxes.
019203840y (km)(a) ∇·u/primeζ/prime
(b) Fζ
div(ψ)
 (c) Fζ
full(ψ)
 (d) Fζ
eff(ψ)
0 1920 3840
x (km)019203840y (km)(e) ∇·u/primeb/prime
0 1920 3840(f) Fb
div(ψ)
0 1920 3840(g) Fb
full(ψ)
0 1920 3840(h) Fb
eff(ψ)
8
4
0481e6
Figure 5. Target data and predictions associated with (top row) eddy relative vorticity flux
(related to the Reynolds stress, units of m s−2) and (bottom row) eddy buoyancy flux (related
to the form stress, units also of m s−2taking into account of the extra factors). Showing ( a, e)
the divergence of the time-averaged eddy relative vorticity and buoyancy flux, and a sample ( b, f)
Fζ/b
div(ψ), (c, g)Fζ/b
full(ψ), (d, h)Fζ/b
eff(ψ) from one of the ensemble members.
a similar decomposition but using the eddy relative vorticity flux u′ζ′(related to the Reynolds
stress via the Taylor identity) and u′b′(related to the form stress). Following the no-
tation outline above, Fig. 5 show the target data ∇ ·u′ζ′and∇ ·u′b′, and the analo-
gous predictions of the divergence of the fluxes denoted by Fζ/b
div/full/eff(ψ).
For the models trained on the data relating to the eddy PV flux shown in Fig. 1,
the predictions are more smooth than the diagnosed target data, and is particularly no-
ticeable for prediction of the divergence of the eddy relative vorticity flux in Fig. 5( b, c, d ).
For the eddy buoyancy case, the diagnosed target data is already relatively smooth. We
note that, visually, Fb
full(ψ) in Fig. 5( g) seems to be possess extra features particularly
in the downstream region, while Fb
eff(ψ) and Fb
div(ψ) in Fig. 5( f, h) seems to be captur-
–12–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
0.40.60.81.0/epsilon1q
L2(a) L2
0.40.60.81.0/epsilon1ζ
L2F(·)
divF(·)
fullF(·)
eff
ψqζ0.40.60.81.0/epsilon1b
L20.20.30.40.50.6/epsilon1q
˙H−1/2(b) ˙H−1/2
0.20.30.40.50.6/epsilon1ζ
˙H−1/2
ψqζ0.20.30.40.50.6/epsilon1b
˙H−1/2
Figure 6. Ensemble average and quartiles of the normalized ( a)L2norm ( b)˙H−1/2semi-
norm, given by Eq. (10) and (13) respectively, for the models predicting the divergence of the
eddy (rows) PV flux, relative vorticity (cf. momentum) flux, and buoyancy flux, over various
choices of inputs. Blue denotes models trained on the divergence of the eddy fluxes, orange
denotes models trained on the full eddy fluxes, and green denotes models trained on the filtered
eddy fluxes. Top row is identical to Fig. 4. The mismatches in Fb
full(q) and Fb
full(ζ) are out of
range of panel, with values around 1.0 and 1.5 respectively.
ing the patterns in the target data well, with some visual hints that the prediction from
Fb
div(ψ) has slightly sharper features.
For a more quantitative measure, we show in Fig. 6 the L2and ˙H−1/2mismatches
inFq/ζ/b
div/full/eff(ψ/q/ζ), totaling the 33= 27 possible combinations. The conclusions over
all these possible choices are largely what was drawn from before but with minor differ-
ences. The models trained up on the filtered eddy fluxes outperform those trained upon
the full eddy fluxes (except for the case of eddy relative vorticity fluxes), and are com-
parable or better than models trained on the divergence of the flux (except in the case
of the eddy buoyancy fluxes).
Noting that eddy PV fluxes have contributions from the eddy buoyancy as well as
eddy relative vorticity fluxes, it is curious that while models trained on the filtered eddy
fluxes compared with models trained on the divergence of the flux appear to perform worse
for the eddy buoyancy flux (bottom row of Fig. 6), but has reasonable performance in
the eddy relative vorticity flux case (middle row of Fig. 6) such that, together, the re-
sulting skill in the eddy PV flux (top row of Fig. 6) still remains comparable (and pos-
sibly slightly better in the ˙H−1/2semi-norm, indicating better matching in terms of large-
scale patterns). One possible explanation for the degradation in performance for eddy
buoyancy fluxes is that ∇·u′b′is already relatively smooth and larger-scale (Fig. 5 e),
which might be favorable for direct use as training data. On the other hand, the eddy
relative vorticity fluxes are inherently smaller-scale (Fig. 5 a), and the presence of small-
scale fluctuation might be unfavorable for direct use as training data, but does not af-
fect models trained on the filtered fluxes as such since the training data is by definition
–13–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
019203840y (km)(a) Ψq
eff from data
 (b) Ψq
eff from Fq
div
(c) Ψq
eff from Fq
full
(d) Ψq
eff from Fq
eff
019203840y (km)(e) Ψζ
eff from data
 (f) Ψζ
eff from Fζ
div
(g) Ψζ
eff from Fζ
full
(h) Ψζ
eff from Fζ
eff
0 1920 3840
x (km)019203840y (km)(i) Ψb
eff from data
0 1920 3840(j) Ψb
eff from Fb
div
0 1920 3840(k) Ψb
eff from Fb
full
0 1920 3840(l) Ψb
eff from Fb
eff
4
2
04
21e4
Figure 7. (a, e, i ) Target eddy force functions Ψq/ζ/b
eff, and eddy force functions associated
with prediction from ( b, f, j ) divergence of the eddy PV, relative vorticity and buoyancy fluxes,
(c, g, k ) full eddy PV, relative vorticity and buoyancy fluxes, and ( d, h, i ) filtered eddy PV,
relative vorticity and buoyancy fluxes, from one of the ensemble members. All data shown here
are in units of m2s−2.
more smooth. The performance of models based on the full eddy relative vorticity fluxes
is somewhat surprising, but may be to do with the smaller component of the rotational
fluxes: examining the decomposition into divergent and rotational parts via the eddy force
function (cf. Fig. 1 b, c, e, f , not shown) it is found that the divergent component is smaller
by about a factor of 2 in the eddy relative vorticity flux, but a factor of 10 in the eddy
buoyancy and PV flux. The results seem to suggest that the main benefits of filtering
dynamically inert rotational fluxes would be in the eddy buoyancy and PV.
For completeness, we show in Fig. 7 the analogous eddy force functions associated
with the predictions from the trained models from one of the ensemble members (although
observations detailed here are robust upon examining the outputs from other members);
note the appropriate mismatches would be closely related to the ˙H−2semi-norm as de-
fined in Eq. (12), but with a difference in the boundary conditions. The predictions from
models trained on the filtered eddy fluxes (panels d, h, i ) have patterns that are largely
aligned with the diagnosed eddy force functions from the data (panels a, e, i ) up to mi-
nor discrepancies (e.g. downstream patterns in panel dcompared to panel a, and panel
lcompared to panel i). The predictions from models trained on the full eddy fluxes (pan-
elsc, g, k ) show similar patterns although with somewhat more mismatches, particularly
in the PV and buoyancy eddy force functions. By contrast, the predictions from the di-
vergence of the eddy fluxes (panels b, f, j ) show large-scale disagreements in all three vari-
ables, the mismatches being visually the gravest in the PV and buoyancy variables. Given
that the eddy force function encodes the dynamically active eddy fluxes, and has an in-
terpretation that ∇Ψeff·∇ψencodes the sign of energy exchange between the mean and
–14–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
eddy component (Maddison et al., 2015), the finding here suggests the predictions from
models trained on the divergence of the eddy fluxes are very likely representing erroneous
energy transfers, particularly for processes associated with eddy buoyancy fluxes.
5 Model robustness
The above observations of model skill and its sensitivity to small-scale fluctuations
brings into question the issue of robustness particularly for the models trained on the
divergence of the eddy fluxes. To explore the sensitivity of skill to noise in the data, we
consider a set of experiments where we add noise η(x, y) to the data at the training stage,
and judge the models’ performance on its ability in predicting the target data without
noise. To make sure we are comparing models in a consistent manner, we add an appro-
priately scaled Gaussian distributed noise η(x, y) to the eddy fluxes ( u′q′,u′ζ′,u′b′), from
which we compute the divergence of the eddy flux as well as the eddy force function from
the noisy data, and train up the models using the procedure outlined above. In that sense
the whole set of models are exposed to the same choice of noise, since 1 unit of noise at
the divergence level is not necessarily the same as 1 unit of noise at the streamfunction
level. The noise level here is measured in units of the standard deviation of the eddy flux
data. The hypothesis is that the models trained on the filtered eddy fluxes are more ro-
bust than those trained on the divergence of the eddy fluxes, and able to maintain model
skill with increased levels of noise.
A note to make here is that the stochastic noise η(x, y) in this regard is formally
non-differentiable in space, so that the divergence operation on it is not well-defined. In
terms of numerical implementation, however, the random numbers sampled from the ap-
propriately scaled Gaussian distribution are the nodal values of the finite element mesh
used in FEniCS, and there is a projection onto a linear basis, so that a derivative op-
eration on the projected η(x, y) is allowed within FEniCS, though the operation may be
numerically sensitive. An approach we considered is filtering the noise field. We consider
solving for some ˜ η(x, y) satisfying
(1−L2∇2)2˜η=η (14)
with no-flux boundary conditions, and it is the resulting ˜ η(x, y) that is added to the train-
ing data. The resulting ˜ ηis by construction differentiable at least once so that a diver-
gence is well-defined. For the operator (1 −L2∇2)2, the associated Green’s function has
a characteristic length-scale Lthat can be interpreted as a filtering length-scale where
the radial spectral power density decreases significantly after L(closely related to the
Mat´ ern auto-covariance, e.g. Whittle, 1963; Lindgren et al., 2018). Note that ‘noise level’
here refers to the magnitude of η(x, y), and that max |˜η(x, y)|<max|η(x, y)|by con-
struction.
TheL2and ˙H−1/2mismatches of Fq/ζ/b
div/full/eff(ψ) to the data as a function of noise
level for the ensemble of models is shown in Fig. 8, and consistently we find that the mod-
els trained up on the eddy force function out-perform the models trained upon the di-
vergence of the eddy flux. The former shows a relative insensitivity to noise level, while
the latter shows a rapid degradation in skill with noise level. It would seem that the use
of eddy force function data alleviates the sensitivity to small-fluctuations in data, at least
in the present measure and approach.
The reduced sensitivity to noise might have been anticipated, since the eddy force
function is a result of an elliptic solve of a Poisson equation, where the noisy data is acted
upon by an inverse Laplacian operator that leads to substantial smoothing. We would
however argue that the relative insensitivity to noise is somewhat surprising, since there
is no guarantee the presence of even reduced fluctuations at the streamfunction level would
stay small after spatial derivatives operations, since we are using the divergence of the
eddy flux as the target for the measure of skill. While one could also argue that the present
–15–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
0.40.60.81.0/epsilon1q
L2(a) L2
0.40.60.81.0/epsilon1ζ
L2F(·)
divF(·)
fullF(·)
eff
0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2
noise level0.40.60.81.0/epsilon1b
L20.20.40.60.81.0/epsilon1q
˙H−1/2(b) ˙H−1/2
0.20.40.60.81.0/epsilon1ζ
˙H−1/2
0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2
noise level0.20.40.60.81.0/epsilon1b
˙H−1/2
Figure 8. Ensemble average and quartiles of the normalized ( a)L2norm ( b)˙H−1/2semi-
norm, given by Eq. (10) and (13) respectively, for the models predicting the divergence of the
eddy (rows) PV flux, relative vorticity (cf. momentum) flux, and buoyancy flux as a function of
noise level (in units of standard deviation of the training data), for models using the time-mean
streamfunction ψas the input. Blue denotes models trained on the divergence of the eddy fluxes,
orange denotes models trained on the full eddy fluxes, and green denotes models trained on the
filtered eddy fluxes.
robustness test is inherently a hard test for models trained upon the divergence of the
eddy flux, we argue the conclusions are robust regardless of whether the noise is added
at the flux, divergence of flux or streamfunction level. In fact, the use of the divergence
of a flux as training data islikely the cause for sensitivity to noise: a inherently small-
scale field is sensitive to the presence of noise in data, so is likely going to lead to issues
with robustness.
The conclusions in the above are qualitatively robust for different choices of the
filtering length-scale L: with reduced L, the degradation of skill in models trained on
the divergence of the eddy fluxes is more rapid with noise level, but the skill of models
trained on the filtered eddy fluxes is still relatively insensitive to noise level, and con-
sistently more skillful than models trained on the divergence of the eddy fluxes. The con-
clusions are also robust for different choices of inputs ( ζandq), and with sample cal-
culations employing other choices of smoothing, coarse-graining (e.g., Aluie, 2019) or fil-
tering (e.g., Grooms et al., 2021) of the noise field η(x, y).
6 Conclusions and outlooks
Data-driven methods are increasingly being employed in problems of Earth Sys-
tem Modeling, and there is no doubt that such methods provide a powerful tool that can
in principle be leveraged to not only improve our modeling efforts, but also deepen our
underlying understanding of the problems. Most works in the literature thus far has fo-
cused on demonstrating the efficacy of the machine-learning methods and algorithms.
Here we take a complimentary line of investigation in considering the choice and qual-
ity of data itself being fed into the algorithms, for a case where we have some theoret-
ical understanding to inform our choice of data. While one could argue this is not en-
–16–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
tirely necessary if we just want something that ‘works’ in the relevant metric(s) for the
problem, we argue it is incredibly useful and if not necessary if we want to be leverag-
ing data-driven methods to learn about the underlying physical problems, and/or have
beyond ‘black-box’ models. Furthermore, the choice of data can in principle improve the
training and/or the performance of the data-driven models themselves, so there is a need
for such an investigation into data quality and information content.
For this work we focused on the problem of eddy-mean interaction in rotating strat-
ified turbulence in the presence of boundaries, relevant to the modeling and parameter-
ization of ocean dynamics. In such systems it is known that the large-scale mean affects
and is affected by the small-scale eddy fluxes, and while we might want to leverage data-
driven methods to learn about the relationship between the mean and the eddy fluxes,
it is known that in the presence of boundaries the eddy feedback onto the mean is in-
variant up to a rotational gauge (e.g. J. C. Marshall & Shutts, 1981; Fox-Kemper et al.,
2003; Eden et al., 2007). In practice the dynamically inert component could be quite large
(e.g., Griesel et al., 2009, , Fig. 1 here), and its presence might be expected to contam-
inate diagnoses and/or performance of data-driven models. One possible way round is
to train models based on its divergence (e.g., Bolton & Zanna, 2019; Zanna & Bolton,
2021). Here we propose that data with the dynamically inert eddy fluxes filtered out could
be used instead. The approach outlined here we argued here may have the advantage
in that the resulting field is inherently larger-scale, which would help with model train-
ing and sensitivity, and be theoretically more appropriate to use if we want to learn about
the underlying physics of the problem, because we do not expect the operations to be
commutative (i.e. given the nonlinearity, learning from the divergence is not guaranteed
to be the same as the divergence of the learned result).
The experimental approach here largely follows that of Bolton and Zanna (2019),
where we diagnose the various data from a quasi-geostrophic double gyre model to train
the model, and compare the model’s performance in its prediction. For filtering the eddy
flux we employ the eddy force function (e.g. D. P. Marshall & Pillar, 2011; Maddison
et al., 2015; Mak et al., 2016), which in the present simply connected quasi-geostrophic
system is provably optimal in the L2norm (and thus unique; see Appendix of Maddi-
son et al., 2015). We made the choice here to measure a model’s skill in being able to
reproduce the divergence of the eddy fluxes over an ensemble of models with 20 mem-
bers and over a variety of input choices. The findings here are that the models trained
on the eddy force function are ( a) more skillful than those trained on the full eddy flux
(except for the relative vorticity eddy fluxes), ( b) at least comparable in skill than mod-
els trained on the divergence of the eddy fluxes (except for the buoyancy eddy fluxes),
and on occasion better, especially in the ˙H−1/2semi-norm compared to the L2norm,
where the former biases matching of the large-scale patterns of the resulting predictions,
and ( c) more robust in that the models are less sensitive to noise in the training data.
The first finding is perhaps not unexpected. The latter two findings we argue are not
entirely obvious, given divergence operations acting at various steps. For example, sam-
ple calculations where a model is trained on the eddy force function directly (and then
taking a Laplacian to obtain a prediction of the divergence of eddy flux) leads to larger
mismatches, which we attribute to the fact that any mismatches in the predicted eddy
force function is significantly amplified by the two derivative operations. With that in
mind, the fact that models trained on the filtered flux reported here leveraging the eddy
force function as a way to filter data leads to models with comparable or better skill and
superior robustness is a non-trivial result.
Exceptions to the above conclusions are that models trained on the divergence of
the eddy buoyancy flux are more skillful (bottom row of Fig. 6), and models trained on
the eddy relative vorticity flux appear comparable whether the rotational component is
filtered out or not (middle row of Fig. 6). The former might be justified in that the eddy
buoyancy flux is already relatively smooth and somewhat larger-scale, so that training
–17–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
on its divergence is not such an issue; however, we also note that the buoyancy eddy force
functions associated with the predictions of model trained on the divergence of the eddy
buoyancy flux seems to perform the worse (bottom of Fig. 7), implying erroneous pre-
dictions of eddy energy pathways. The latter behavior is possibly to do with the obser-
vation that the dynamically inert rotational component is comparable to the dynami-
cally active divergent component in the eddy relative vorticity flux (as opposed to the
rotational component being a factor of ten smaller in the eddy PV and buoyancy flux;
see Fig. 1 b, c, e, d for eddy PV flux), so the effect of filtering is somewhat marginal. One
saving grace is that, in the quasi-geostrophic system, the potential vorticity (with con-
tributions from relative vorticity and buoyancy) is the master variable, and that while
models trained up on the relative vorticity or buoyancy fluxes perform better separately,
the models trained up on the eddy force function has skill and robustness in the mas-
ter variable. We note that the conclusions reported here appear to be robust even if we
use data with only some of the rotational component filtered out in sample calculations
(e.g., solving for ˜ψin Eq. 6 with no normal flux boundary conditions, not shown), al-
though we lose a little bit of skill and the physical interpretation associated with the eddy
force function.
One thing we caution here is drawing a one-to-one comparison of the present work
with that of Bolton and Zanna (2019) and Zanna and Bolton (2021). While it is true
those works utilize a similar model, experimental procedure and data, the main theo-
retical difference is that the choice of average is different: their work utilizes a spatial
average, and the eddy flux data there is defined as the difference between the filtered di-
vergence and the divergence of the filtered field (if making an assumption of the zero di-
vergence condition on the resulting velocities). Here we utilize a time average, which is
in line with the definition of the eddy force function in Maddison et al. (2015), which re-
quires a Reynolds average. While we have not attempted a similar investigation in the
case of spatial averaging, it is not implausible that there is an analogous object to the
eddy force function when a spatial average is employed, or that a simple Helmholtz-type
decomposition could yield the desired filtering of the dynamically inert rotational com-
ponent, but is beyond the scope of the present investigation.
Because of the choice of time average, we have limited data in time, and one could
wonder whether our conclusions are simply to do with the limited data availability. This
is unlikely the case: we also carried out an analogous investigation with rolling time av-
erages as well as ensemble averages (not shown), and the conclusions drawn from those
results are essentially identical to those here. This is perhaps not surprising noting that
the rolling time averages for a long enough window and the ensemble averages shown no
strong deviations from each other, but we note this is likely only true for a sufficiently
simple system with no strong evidence of internal modes of variability, such as the one
employed here.
The main intention of the present work is to demonstrate that not all data choices
are equal when fed to data-driven methods, and it is not always advisable throwing all
the available data at the machine and trust that the machine will figure out what to do
with it (although one could argue that might reduce the inherent biases). For the case
of rotating stratified turbulence, the eddy force function is potentially a useful quantity
if we aim to leverage data-drive methods for model skill or for learning about the un-
derlying physics of the problem, given the various theoretical expectations highlighted
in this work. Other choices may be possible: in a periodic domain often used in rotat-
ing turbulence studies (e.g., Frezat et al., 2022; Ross et al., 2023), a standard Helmholtz
decomposition could be used to solve for the divergent component, although the eddy
force could still be used for physical interpretation. We note that while skill in repro-
ducing eddy forcing is one target, we have not examined here on the ability of the model
to reproduce the mean state, and the present procedure might be termed an ‘offline’ ap-
proach. Learning ‘online’ (e.g., Frezat et al., 2022) may be more appropriate for param-
–18–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
eterization purposes to improve on the mean response, and it would be of interest to see
whether filtering of the eddy flux as discussed here would confer any benefits to model
learning.
The present work also highlights questions relating to information content of data.
While quantifying absolute data information content is likely quite difficult, it should
be at least possible to compute a relative measure, even if empirically. Preliminary in-
vestigation indicates that as the amount of data exposed to the machine learning algo-
rithm is reduced, the accuracy of models trained upon the full eddy flux or the diver-
gence of the eddy flux degrades much faster than models trained upon the eddy force
function. One might ask an analogous question of the input data. The work of Bolton
and Zanna (2019) suggests for example that training with data from regions with higher
eddy kinetic energy leads to better model performance in terms of accuracy, suggestive
of higher information content in said region. Within the present experimental framework,
instead of training using all the data and performing a random sampling of the sub-regions
considered in this work, we could consider instead not using all the data, and perform
training based on a biased sampling that favor regions with higher eddy energy content,
with the hypothesis that the latter case leads to models with higher accuracy from a sta-
tistical point of view. Further, we could investigate the case of multiple inputs, where
we hypothesize that eddy energy and a mean state variable as inputs might lead to im-
proved performance compared to say two mean state variables: in the current quasi-geostrophic
setting, the mean state variables are functionally related to each other, possibly lead-
ing to redundant information, while the eddy energy might be dependent on the mean
state, but is capturing eddy statistics instead and providing complementary information.
This investigation is ongoing and will be reported elsewhere in due course.
Data Availability Statement
This work utilizes FEniCS ( 2019.1.0 ) that is available as a Python package. The
source code for the model ( qgm2, from James Maddison), sample model data and scripts
used for generating the plots in this article from the processed data are available through
http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8072817 .
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by both RGC General Research Fund 16304021 and the
Center for Ocean Research in Hong Kong and Macau, a joint research center between
the Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology and Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology. We thank James Maddison and Liiyung Yeow for
various scientific and technical comments in relation to the present investigation, and
the former for providing the qgm2 code for use in the present work.
References
Alnæs, M. S., Logg, A., Ølgaard, K. B., Rognes, M. E., & Wells, G. N. (2014).
Unified Form Language: A domain-specific language for weak formulations of
partial differential equations. ACM Trans. Math. Softw. ,40, 9:1–9:37.
Aluie, H. (2019). Convolutions on the sphere: Commutation with differential opera-
tors. GEM: Int. J. Geomath. ,10, 1–31. doi: 10.1007/s13137-019-0123-9
Andersson, T. R., Hosking, J. S., P´ erez-Ortiz, M., Paige, B., A. Elliott, C. R.,
Law, S., . . . Shuckburgh, E. (2021). Seasonal Arctic sea ice forecasting
with probabilistic deep learning. Nat. Commun. ,12, 5124. doi: 10.1038/
s41467-021-25257-4
Barnes, E. A., Barnes, R. J., Martin, Z. K., & Rader, J. K. (2022). This
looks like that there: Interpretable neural networks for image tasks when
–19–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
location matters. Artif. Intell. Earth Syst. ,1(3), e220001. doi: 10.1175/
AIES-D-22-0001.1
Berloff, P. (2005). On dynamically consistent eddy fluxes. Dyn. Atmos. Ocean. ,38,
123–146.
Besombes, C., Pannekoucke, O., Lapeyre, C., Sanderson, B., & Thual, O. (2021).
Producing realistic climate data with generative adversarial networks.
Nonlinear Process Geophys. ,28(3), 347–370. doi: 10.5194/npg-28-347-2021
Beucler, T., Pritchard, M., Rasp, S., Ott, J., Baldi, P., & Gentine, P. (2021). Enforc-
ing analytic constraints in neural networks emulating physical systems. Phys.
Rev. Lett. ,126, 098302. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.098302
Bolibar, J., Rabatel, A., Gouttevin, I., Galiez, C., Condom, T., & Sauquet, E.
(2020). Deep learning applied to glacier evolution modelling. Cryosphere ,
14(2), 565–584. doi: 10.5194/tc-14-565-2020
Bolton, T., & Zanna, L. (2019). Applications of deep learning to ocean data infer-
ence and sub-grid parameterisation. J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst. ,11, 376–399.
doi: 10.1029/2018MS001472
Brenowitz, N. D., Beucler, T., Pritchard, M., & Bretherton, C. S. (2020). Interpret-
ing and stabilizing machine-learning parametrizations of convection. J. Atmos.
Sci.,77, 4357–4375. doi: 10.1175/JAS-D-20-0082.1
Brenowitz, N. D., & Bretherton, C. S. (2019). Spatially extended tests of a neu-
ral network parametrization trained by coarse-graining. J. Adv. Model. Earth.
Syst.,11, 2728–2744. doi: 10.1029/2019MS001711
Camps-Valls, G., Gerhardus, A., Ninad, U., Varando, G., Martius, G., Balaguer-
Ballester, E., . . . Runge, J. (2023). Discovering Causal Relations and
Equations from Data.
Clare, M. C. A., Sonnewald, M., Lguensat, R., Deshayes, J., & Balaji, V. (2022).
Explainable Artificial Intelligence for Bayesian neural networks: Toward
trustworthy predictions of ocean dynamics. J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst. ,14(11),
e2022MS003162. doi: 10.1029/2022MS003162
Connolly, C., Barnes, E. A., Hassanzadeh, P., & Pritchard, M. (2023). Using neural
networks to learn the Jet Stream forced response from natural variability. Ar-
tif. Intell. Earth Syst. ,2, e220094. doi: 10.1175/AIES-D-22-0094.1
Eden, C., Greatbatch, R. J., & Olbers, D. (2007). Interpreting eddy fluxes. J. Phys.
Oceanogr. ,37, 1282–1296.
Fox-Kemper, B., Ferrari, R., & Pedlosky, J. (2003). On the indeterminacy of rota-
tional and divergent eddy fluxes. J. Phys. Oceanogr. ,33, 478–483.
Frezat, H., Le Sommer, J., Fablet, R., Balarac, G., & Lguensat, R. (2022). A poste-
riori learning for quasi-geostrophic turbulence parametrization. J. Adv. Model.
Earth Syst. ,14(11), e2022MS003124. doi: 10.1029/2022MS003124
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning . MIT Press.
(http://www.deeplearningbook.org )
Green, J. S. A. (1970). Transfer properties of the large-scale eddies and the general
circulation of the atmosphere. Q. J. Roy. Met. Soc. ,96, 157–185.
Griesel, A., Gille, S. T., Sprintall, J., McClean, J. L., & Maltrud, M. E. (2009).
Assessing eddy heat flux and its parameterization: A wavenumber perspective
from a 1/10◦ocean simulation. Ocean Modell. ,29, 248–260.
Grooms, I., Loose, N., Abernathey, R., Steinberg, J. M., Bachman, S. D., Marques,
G., . . . Yankovsky, E. (2021). Diffusion-based smoothers for spatial filtering of
gridded geophysical data. J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst. ,13, e2021MS002552. doi:
10.1029/2021MS002552
Guan, Y., Subel, A., Chattopadhyay, A., & Hassanzadeh, P. (2023). Learning
physics-constrained subgrid-scale closures in the small-data regime for stable
and accurate LES. Physica D ,443, 133568. doi: 10.1016/j.physd.2022.133568
Guillaumin, A. P., & Zanna, L. (2021). Stochastic-deep learning parameterization
of ocean momentum forcing. J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst. ,13, e2021MS002534.
–20–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
doi: 10.1029/2021MS002534
Irrgang, C., Boers, N., Sonnewald, M., Barnes, E. A., Kadow, C., Staneva, J., &
Saynisch-Wagner, J. (2021). Towards neural Earth system modelling by
integrating artificial intelligence in Earth system science. Nat. Mach. Intell. ,3,
667–674. doi: 10.1038/s42256-021-00374-3
Jones, D. C., Holt, H. J., Meijers, A. J. S., & Shuckburgh, E. (2019). Unsupervised
clustering of Southern Ocean Argo float temperature profiles. J. Geophys. Res.
Oceans ,124(1), 390–402. doi: 10.1029/2018JC014629
Karabasov, S. A., Berloff, P. S., & Goloviznin, V. M. (2009). CABARET in the
ocean gyres. Ocean Modell. ,30, 155–168.
Kashinath, K., Mustafa, M., Albert, A., Wu, J., Jiang, C., Esmaeilzadeh, S., . . .
Prabhat (2021). Physics-informed machine learning: case studies for weather
and climate modelling. Philos. Trans. Royal Soc. A ,379(2194), 20200093. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2020.0093
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In
Y. Bengio & Y. LeCun (Eds.), Iclr (poster).
Lindgren, F., Rue, H., & Lindstr¨ om, J. (2018). An explicit link between Gaussian
fields and Gaussian Markov random fields: The stochastic partial differential
equation approach. J. R. Stat. Soc. Series B Stat. Methodol. ,73, 423–498. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-9868.2011.00777.x
Logg, A., Mardal, K. A., & Wells, G. N. (2012). Automated Solution of Differential
Equations by the Finite Element Method . Springer.
Logg, A., & Wells, G. N. (2010). DOLFIN: Automated finite element computing.
ACM Trans. Math. Softw. ,37, 20:1–20:28.
Lopez-Gomez, I., Christopoulos, C., Langeland Ervik, H. L., Dunbar, O. R. A.,
Cohen, Y., & Schneider, T. (2022). Training physics-based machine-learning
parameterizations with gradient-free ensemble Kalman methods. J. Adv.
Model. Earth Syst. ,14(8), e2022MS003105. doi: 10.1029/2022MS003105
Maddison, J. R., & Marshall, D. P. (2013). The Eliassen–Palm flux tensor. J. Fluid
Mech. ,729, 69–102. doi: 10.1017/jfm.2013.259
Maddison, J. R., Marshall, D. P., & Shipton, J. (2015). On the dynamical influence
of ocean eddy potential vorticity fluxes. Ocean Modell. ,92, 169–182.
Mak, J., Maddison, J. R., & Marshall, D. P. (2016). A new gauge-invariant method
for diagnosing eddy diffusivities. Ocean Modell. ,104, 252–268. doi: 10.1016/
j.ocemod.2016.06.006
Marshall, D. P., Maddison, J. R., & Berloff, P. S. (2012). A framework for parame-
terizing eddy potential vorticity fluxes. J. Phys. Oceanogr. ,42, 539–557. doi:
10.1175/JPO-D-11-048.1
Marshall, D. P., & Pillar, H. R. (2011). Momentum balance of the wind-driven and
meridional overturning circulation. J. Phys. Oceanogr. ,41, 960–978.
Marshall, J. C. (1981). On the parameterization of geostrophic eddies in the ocean.
J. Phys. Oceanogr. ,11, 257–271.
Marshall, J. C., & Shutts, G. J. (1981). A note on rotational and divergent eddy
fluxes. J. Phys. Oceanogr. ,11, 1677–1680. doi: 10.1175/1520-0485(1981)
011⟨1677:ANORAD ⟩2.0.CO;2
Mooers, G., Pritchard, M., Beucler, T., Ott, J., Yacalis, G., Baldi, P., & Gentine,
P. (2021). Assessing the potential of deep learning for emulating cloud
superparameterization in climate models with real-geography boundary
conditions. J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst. ,13, e2020MS002385. doi: 10.1002/
2020MS002385
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., . . . Chintala,
S. (2019). Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d 'Alch´ e-Buc, E. Fox,
& R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems
(Vol. 32). Curran Associates, Inc.
–21–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Reichstein, M., Camps-Valls, G., Stevens, B., Jung, M., Denzler, J., Carvalhais, N.,
& Prabhat. (2019). Deep learning and process understanding for data-driven
Earth system science. Nature ,566, 195–204. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-0912-1
Rhines, P. B., & Young, W. R. (1982). Homogenization of potential vorticity in
planetary gyres. J. Fluid Mech. ,122, 347-367.
Ross, A., Li, Z., Perezhogin, P., Fernandez-Granda, C., & Zanna, L. (2023).
Benchmarking of machine learning ocean subgrid parameterizations in an
idealized model. J. Adv. Model. Earth. Syst. ,15(1), e2022MS003258. doi:
10.1029/2022MS003258
Sonnewald, M., & Lguensat, R. (2021). Revealing the impact of global heating on
North Atlantic circulation using transparent machine learning. J. Adv. Model.
Earth. Syst. ,13(8), e2021MS002496. doi: 10.1029/2021MS002496
Sonnewald, M., Lguensat, R., Jones, D. C., Dueben, P. D., Brajard, J., & Balaji,
V. (2021). Bridging observations, theory and numerical simulation of the
ocean using machine learning. Environ. Res. Lett. ,16(7), 073008. doi:
10.1088/1748-9326/ac0eb0
Sonnewald, M., Reeves, K. A., & Lguensat, R. (2023). A Southern Ocean supergyre
as a unifying dynamical framework identified by physics-informed machine
learning. Commun. Earth Environ. ,4, 153. doi: 10.1038/s43247-023-00793-7
Sonnewald, M., Wunsch, C., & Heimbach, P. (2019). Unsupervised learning reveals
geography of global ocean dynamical regions. Earth Space Sci. ,6(5), 784–794.
doi: 10.1029/2018EA000519
Student. (1908). The probably error of a mean. Biometrika ,6, 1–25. doi: 10.2307/
2331554
Sun, Y. Q., Hassanzadeh, P., Alexander, M. J., & Kruse, C. G. (2023). Quantifying
3D gravity wave drag in a library of tropical convection-permitting simulations
for data-driven parameterizations. J. Adv. Model. Earth. Syst. ,15(5),
e2022MS003585. doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2022MS003585
Thiffeault, J.-L. (2012). Using multiscale norms to quantify mixing and transport.
Nonlinearity ,84, R1–R44. doi: 10.1088/0951-7715/25/2/R1
Thomas, S. D. A., Jones, D. C., Faul, A., Mackie, E., & Pauthenet, E. (2021). Defin-
ing Southern Ocean fronts using unsupervised classification. Ocean Sci. ,17(6),
1545–1562. doi: 10.5194/os-17-1545-2021
Vallis, G. K. (2006). Atmospheric and Oceanic Fluid Dynamics . Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Waterman, S., & Hoskins, B. J. (2013). Eddy shape, orientation, propagation, and
mean flow feedback in western boundary current jets. J. Phys. Oceanogr. ,43,
1666–1690. doi: 10.1175/JPO-D-12-0152.1
Waterman, S., & Jayne, S. R. (2011). Eddy-mean flow interactions in the along-
stream development of western boundary current jet: An idealized model
study. J. Phys. Oceanogr. ,41, 682–707. doi: 10.1175/2010JPO4477.1
Whittle, P. (1963). Stochastic processes in several dimensions. Bull. Int. Stat. Inst. ,
40, 974–994.
Young, W. R. (2012). An exact thickness-weighted average formulation of the
Boussinesq equations. J. Phys. Oceanogr. ,42, 692–707. doi: 10.1175/
JPO-D-11-0102.1
Yuval, J., & O’Gorman, P. A. (2020). Stable machine-learning parameterization
of subgrid processes for climate modeling at a range of resolutions. Nat. Com-
mun. ,11, 3295. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-17142-3
Yuval, J., O’Gorman, P. A., & Hill, C. N. (2021). Use of neural networks for stable,
accurate and physically consistent parameterization of subgrid atmospheric
processes with good performance at reduced precision. Geophys. Res. Lett. ,48,
e2020GL091363. doi: 10.1029/2020GL091363
Zanna, L., & Bolton, T. (2021). Data-driven equation discovery of ocean
mesoscale closures. Geophys. Res. Lett. ,47, e2020GL088376. doi:
–22–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
10.1029/2020GL088376
Zhang, S., & Lin, G. (2018). Robust data-driven discovery of governing physical laws
with error bars. Proc. R. Soc. A ,474, 20180305. doi: 10.1098/rspa.2018.0305
–23–
