manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Spatio-Temporal Super-Resolution Data Assimilation
(SRDA) Utilizing Deep Neural Networks with Domain
Generalization
Yuki Yasuda1and Ryo Onishi1
1Global Scientific Information and Computing Center, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama,
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 1528550, Japan
Key Points:
•We propose a neural network-based scheme for data assimilation and spatio-temporal
super-resolution using physics-based simulations
•A data-augmentation technique was developed to improve the robustness of in-
ference in the fusion of data-driven and physics-based models
•A test with idealized ocean jets showed that the proposed approach efficiently in-
fers high-resolution results with ensuring the robustness
Corresponding author: Yuki Yasuda, yasuda.y.aa@m.titech.ac.jp
–1–arXiv:2212.03656v2  [physics.ao-ph]  20 Sep 2023
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Abstract
Deep learning has recently gained attention in the atmospheric and oceanic sciences for
its potential to improve the accuracy of numerical simulations or to reduce computational
costs. Super-resolution is one such technique for high-resolution inference from low-resolution
data. This paper proposes a new scheme, called four-dimensional super-resolution data
assimilation (4D-SRDA). This framework calculates the time evolution of a system from
low-resolution simulations using a physics-based model, while a trained neural network
simultaneously performs data assimilation and spatio-temporal super-resolution. The use
of low-resolution simulations without ensemble members reduces the computational cost
of obtaining inferences at high spatio-temporal resolution. In 4D-SRDA, physics-based
simulations and neural-network inferences are performed alternately, possibly causing
a domain shift, i.e., a statistical difference between the training and test data, especially
in offline training. Domain shifts can reduce the accuracy of inference. To mitigate this
risk, we developed super-resolution mixup (SR-mixup)–a data augmentation method for
domain generalization. SR-mixup creates a linear combination of randomly sampled in-
puts, resulting in synthetic data with a different distribution from the original data. The
proposed methods were validated using an idealized barotropic ocean jet with supervised
learning. The results suggest that the combination of 4D-SRDA and SR-mixup is effec-
tive for robust inference cycles. This study highlights the potential of super-resolution
and domain-generalization techniques, in the field of data assimilation, especially for the
integration of physics-based and data-driven models.
Plain Language Summary
One challenge in the Earth sciences is the simulation of atmospheric and oceanic
processes with high accuracy or at high spatio-temporal resolution. The neural network,
a model developed in the field of artificial intelligence, has recently gained attention for
its potential to learn the relationship between any variables from a sufficient amount of
data. For example, a neural network can be trained to make high-resolution images from
low-resolution images. This process is called super-resolution. We propose the incorpo-
ration of a neural network for super-resolution into an atmospheric or ocean model that
performs numerical simulations at low resolution. Since the atmospheric or ocean model
is of low resolution, the proposed framework is computationally efficient while still al-
lowing for high-resolution results with the aid of the neural network. Furthermore, to
make the inference accurate, observation data are fused with atmospheric or ocean pre-
dictions in the neural network. In real-world applications, it is important to make pre-
dictions robust to noise from various factors. Accordingly, we developed a new technique
where certain noise is added during the training of the neural network. The approach
proposed here can efficiently compute high-resolution predictions of the atmosphere and
ocean without compromising robustness.
–2–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
1 Introduction
Numerical simulation is an essential tool in the atmospheric and oceanic sciences.
Despite the ever-increasing computer resources, it may still be difficult to conduct nu-
merical simulations at high resolution or with high accuracy. One solution is to employ
data-driven models such as neural networks (NNs) (Brunton et al., 2020; Duraisamy, 2021;
Kashinath et al., 2021). For instance, NNs have been used for surrogate modeling of the
Navier-Stokes equations, subgrid-scale modeling of Reynolds stress tensors, and super-
resolution of fluid flows. These NNs can make numerical simulations more efficient or
more accurate.
Super-resolution (SR) refers to techniques that infer high-resolution (HR) images
from low-resolution (LR) images. Methods based on deep learning have been studied in
computer vision (e.g., Dong et al., 2014; Ha et al., 2019; Anwar et al., 2020). The suc-
cess of such NNs has promoted the applications of SR to atmospheric and oceanic data
(e.g., Ducournau & Fablet, 2016; Vandal et al., 2017; Onishi et al., 2019; Stengel et al.,
2020; J. Wang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Yasuda et al., 2023). One example is SR sim-
ulation (Onishi et al., 2019; J. Wang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021). With this scheme,
time evolution is calculated from LR simulations using a physics-based model, and HR
inferences are obtained by inputting the LR results into a trained NN. Super-resolution
simulation is computationally efficient because it requires only LR simulations using a
physics-based model, and the elapsed time of inference by a NN is usually negligible. How-
ever, there is a concern that LR simulations may deviate from the true state because of
unresolved processes. Data assimilation may be useful for reducing such deviation.
Data assimilation (DA) is a framework that estimates the state of a system based
on observations and background states provided by a model (Asch et al., 2016). Meth-
ods of DA are typically variational or statistical, with NNs being applied to both types.
Recent progress in the application of NNs to DA has been summarized in a review (Cheng
et al., 2023). Variational methods, such as 4D-Var, are analogous to deep learning, in
that both employ adjoint backpropagation (Abarbanel et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018).
The minimization of variational cost can be conducted with NNs, achieving more pre-
cise 4D-Var estimations (Fablet et al., 2021; Beauchamp et al., 2022). Neural networks
have also been incorporated into statistical methods, such as ensemble Kalman filters
(EnKFs). To reduce the computational cost of calculating ensemble evolution, the sys-
tem model can be replaced with a NN (Ouala et al., 2018; Chattopadhyay et al., 2022).
In addition, the analysis step can be conducted in low-dimensional latent spaces to fur-
ther increase computational efficiency (Amendola et al., 2021; Peyron et al., 2021; C. Liu
et al., 2022). Instead of replacing system models, ensemble members can be obtained us-
ing generative models, such as variational autoencoders (VAEs), which also reduce com-
putation time (Grooms, 2021; Yang & Grooms, 2021).
Super-resolution has recently been included in DA processes (Barth´ el´ emy et al.,
2022), as super-resolution data assimilation (SRDA), which applies a statistical DA method,
such as EnKF, to flow fields super-resolved by a NN. SRDA can be interpreted as a fu-
sion of SR simulation and DA. Specifically, the time evolution of an ensemble is obtained
–3–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
from LR simulations via a physics-based model, as in SR simulation. The NN indepen-
dently super-resolves each LR result in the ensemble. Observations are then assimilated
into these super-resolved HR data. The obtained HR analysis is mapped to the LR space
using algebraic methods, such as linear interpolation, and this mapped state provides
the initial condition for the next assimilation cycle. SRDA performs super-resolution and
data assimilation separately, making it easy to incorporate into an existing DA frame-
work. Some studies have shown that NNs can perform the entire or a part of the anal-
ysis step. For instance, NNs can directly infer the analysis states (Krishnan et al., 2015;
Fraccaro et al., 2017) or can estimate background error covariance matrices (Ouala et
al., 2018; Grooms, 2021). These studies imply the potential for simultaneous SR and DA.
However, to the authors’ knowledge, SR has yet to be fully studied in the context of DA
and such a proof of concept has not been demonstrated.
In SRDA (Barth´ el´ emy et al., 2022), physics-based simulations and NN inferences
are alternated, potentially causing a domain shift (e.g., Moreno-Torres et al., 2012), in
which the statistical distribution differs between the training and test data. Domain shifts
can occur whenever physics-based simulations and NN inferences are interdependent. For
instance, if training data are generated in advance via physics-based simulations (i.e.,
offline training), a domain shift will occur because the training data are independent of
the NN inference. Although this issue is briefly mentioned by Barth´ el´ emy et al. (2022),
it has not been investigated. Online training provides a potential solution to this domain
shift (Rasp, 2020). In this approach, training data are updated during the optimization
of NNs through physics-based simulations (e.g., Krasnopolsky & Belochitski, 2020). How-
ever, online training may be computationally intensive and is not always feasible.
Domain generalization aims to improve generalizability across datasets with dif-
ferent distributions and to overcome domain shift problems (e.g., J. Wang et al., 2022;
Zhou et al., 2022). Domain generalization is similar to transfer learning, but differs in
access to the test-data distribution. In transfer learning, a pre-trained NN is fine-tuned
using small samples with the same distribution as the test data. In contrast, in scenar-
ios of domain generalization, fine-tuning is impossible because such samples are not avail-
able. In other words, the test-data distribution remains unknown up to the test phase.
Domain-generalization methods may be useful for fusing data-driven and physics-based
models; however, the applicability of domain generalization in applying NNs to fluid sys-
tems remains unclear, particularly for atmospheric or oceanic data assimilation.
In this study, we propose a novel data-assimilation scheme, four-dimensional SRDA
(4D-SRDA), incorporating SR-mixup—a novel domain-generalization technique. In 4D-
SRDA, DA and spatio-temporal SR are performed simultaneously by a NN, while the
system’s time evolution is obtained from physics-based LR simulations. This scheme does
not require ensemble members and is computationally efficient. To mitigate the risk of
domain shifts and the associated deterioration in inference accuracy, we employed SR-
mixup—a data-augmentation technique based on the mixup method (Zhang et al., 2018;
Yao et al., 2022). The validity of this scheme was demonstrated using an idealized barotropic
ocean jet (David et al., 2017). The 4D-SRDA and SR-mixup are applicable to physics-
based models that use gridded input and output data. This study implies the potential
–4–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
of SR and domain generalization, in the field of DA, for integrating physics-based and
data-driven models.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 4D-SRDA is first proposed in
Section 2. SR-mixup is then independently presented in Section 3. Numerical experi-
ments are described in Section 4, where the NN in the 4D-SRDA system is trained us-
ing SR-mixup. Section 5 evaluates the performance of the 4D-SRDA system and discusses
the robustness of inference enhanced by SR-mixup. Section 6 presents the conclusions.
2 Four-Dimensional Super-Resolution Data Assimilation (4D-SRDA)
2.1 General Concept
4D-SRDA comprises a NN and a physics-based model. The latter is typically an
atmosphere or ocean model and is simply referred to as a “fluid model.” The system’s
time evolution is calculated from LR simulations using the fluid model. The DA and spatio-
temporal SR are performed simultaneously using the NN. Unlike EnKF and 4D-Var, the
proposed method does not require ensemble members or iterative calculations and is com-
putationally efficient.
The calculation process in each assimilation cycle is shown in Figure 1. Consider
the time series of observations and fluid-model states. The former are time-stamped and
geolocated point-cloud data, while the latter are LR grid-point data. The LR fluid-model
states generally include past, present, and future times, whereas observations are avail-
able only for the past and present. Using these two input types, the NN infers a flow-
field time series at high spatio-temporal resolution. In the NN, the observations are con-
verted from point-cloud to grid-point data. The converted observations and the LR model
states are fused through a low-dimensional latent space by utilizing an encoder–decoder
architecture. Because of the encoder, the observations do not necessarily have to be phys-
ical quantities—they can also be arbitrary quantities correlated with the true state of
the system. In principle, the nonlinear mapper in Figure 1 represents any mapping in
the latent space, including temporal SR (Section 4.2), while its specific form is determined
by training. A snapshot of the inferred HR states is downsampled to the LR grid space
using an algebraic operation, such as linear interpolation. The obtained LR snapshot is
regarded as the analysis (the initial condition), from which an LR fluid simulation is con-
ducted. The obtained output—a time series of LR model states—is used as input to the
NN in the next assimilation cycle. This process (Figure 1) is repeated once new obser-
vations are obtained.
There are two key differences between 4D-SRDA and SRDA (Barth´ el´ emy et al.,
2022). First, in 4D-SRDA, the input to the NN contains a time series of fluid-model states,
whereas in SRDA, the input is a snapshot of these states. Second, in 4D-SRDA, the NN
simultaneously performs DA and spatio-temporal SR, whereas in SRDA, the NN con-
ducts spatial SR followed by a statistical DA (e.g., EnKF). Both 4D-SRDA and SRDA
obtain the time evolution of the system via LR fluid simulation. SRDA is easily appli-
cable to existing DA frameworks because it performs SR and DA separately; however,
–5–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Observation
(point cloud)
Model state
(LR time series)Projection
to grid points
Inference
(HR time series)
Inference
(LR snapshot)Physics-based model (LR)Encoder
DecoderNonlinear
mapper
(in latent space)Neural network
Figure 1. Calculation process of four-dimensional super-resolution data-assimilation (4D-
SRDA). The physics-based model, typically an atmosphere or ocean model, uses grid-point data
as its input and output.
this separation may not fully optimize SR inference for DA. In contrast, 4D-SRDA may
achieve more accurate inference because it adopts end-to-end learning that simultane-
ously optimizes the SR and DA processes; however, the feasibility of such learning is un-
clear. This study presents an offline supervised learning method employing a new tech-
nique, SR-mixup, which mitigates the influence of domain shift (Section 3). Unsuper-
vised or online learning is another important topic for future research.
2.2 Algorithm of 4D-SRDA Inference
The details of the 4D-SRDA inference are given for one assimilation cycle shown
in Figure 2a, where the assimilation window has the same length as the forecast period.
This configuration is used for the numerical experiments in Sections 4 and 5. More gen-
eral cases are briefly discussed later in this section.
We first describe the input to the NN. A time series of LR states is obtained by
numerically integrating the LR fluid model:
{XLR(t0+i∆tLR)}i=−1,0,1={XLR(t0−∆tLR),XLR(t0),XLR(t0+ ∆tLR)},(1)
where the current time is denoted by t0and ∆ tLRis the LR time step for the output.
The initial condition XLR(t0−∆tLR) is given by the previous analysis state; XLR(t0)
andXLR(t0+∆tLR) are the current and future states estimated by the LR fluid model,
respectively. Each snapshot XLRis defined on the LR spatial grid points and is gener-
ally composed of various three-dimensional field quantities, such as velocity and temper-
ature. Observations are assumed to be given as:
{OHR(t0+j∆tLR)}j=−1,0={OHR(t0−∆tLR),OHR(t0)}, (2)
which does not include the future time t0+∆tLR. The observation OHRalso consists
of several three-dimensional quantities and is defined on the HR spatial grid points, in-
–6–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
(b) Supervised training phase
4D-SRDA inference LR fluid simulation 
HR fluid
simulation
LR fluid
simulation
Observation
4D-SRDA
inferenceTime Resizing
ResizingInference
LR fluid
simulation
(a) Inference phase
4D-SRDA inference LR fluid simulation
LR fluid
simulation
Observation
4D-SRDA
inference
LR fluid
simulationInference4D-SRDA
inference
Resizing
ResizingCurrent time
Time
Figure 2. Schematics for (a) inference and (b) supervised training. The low- and high-
resolution (LR and HR) time steps are denoted by ∆ tLRand ∆ tHR, respectively, where
∆tLR = 4∆ tHR. The assimilation interval is assumed to be ∆ tLR. In (a), the 4D-SRDA infer-
ence and LR fluid simulation are alternated, whereas in (b), the 4D-SRDA inference is not used
to conduct LR fluid simulations. Thus, (b) does not consider feedback from the neural network
to the LR fluid model. The configuration illustrated here was employed in the numerical experi-
ments in Sections 4 and 5.
cluding missing data. The HR spatial resolution is assumed to be four times finer than
the LR resolution.
A trained NN, denoted by f, super-resolves the time series of the LR fluid-model
states while incorporating the observations:
{ˆYHR(t0+k∆tHR)}k=−4,...,4=f 
{XLR(t0+i∆tLR)}i=−1,0,1,{OHR(t0+j∆tLR)}j=−1,0
.
(3)
The time series of ˆYHRis composed of the same three-dimensional quantities as XLR,
whereas ˆYHRis obtained on the HR spatio-temporal grid points. For instance, in Fig-
ure 2a, the HR temporal resolution is four times finer, i.e., ∆ tHR= ∆tLR/4. A hat in-
dicates that ˆYHRis a NN inference. The input of the future LR state XLR(t0+∆tLR)
is expected to serve as auxiliary information for time evolution, helping the NN infer the
HR states at future times. The output ˆYHR(t0) for the current time t0is mapped onto
the LR spatial grid points using an algebraic method, such as linear interpolation. This
mapped state is utilized as the initial condition for the LR fluid model in the next as-
similation cycle, in which the current time t0is moved to t0+ ∆tLR(the assimilation
interval is ∆ tLR). The outputs at the other time steps, such as ˆYHR(t0−∆tHR) and
ˆYHR(t0+ ∆tHR), are not used in the next assimilation cycle.
Various modifications of the above algorithm are possible. For instance, more LR
time steps can be included in the inference, whereas three time steps are used in Equa-
tion 3; the length of the assimilation window or forecast period can be varied, whereas
both have the same length in Figure 2a; the scale factor of the spatial or temporal SR
can be changed, whereas both factors are set to four above; and the past data can be
eliminated from the input to the NN, leaving only the present and future input data, in
contrast to Equation 3.
–7–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
In this research, two assumptions are made for observation data: (i) mappability
to any space-time point and (ii) statistical stationarity. Equation 2 is based on the first
assumption; that is, the observations can be mapped to the HR spatial grid points and
LR time points by spatio-temporal interpolation. In real-world applications, such inter-
polation cannot be directly applied to integrated quantities. For instance, mapping cu-
mulative precipitation to the time axis is not straightforward. Investigating the treat-
ment of integrated quantities is beyond the scope of this study. Thus, we make the first
assumption. NNs can be effective in solving such an inverse problem. In particular, the
reconstruction techniques of three-dimensional point cloud data from two-dimensional
images (e.g., Mandikal et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020) would be useful to assimilate inte-
grated observations.
The second assumption covers stationarity in terms of both temporal and spatial
statistics, which indicates that observation errors, including measurement and represen-
tativeness errors, are stationary. This assumption facilitates the representation learn-
ing of observations with missing data (Section 5.2), but is not necessarily satisfied in real-
world applications. It is worth noting here that the statistical stationarity does not im-
ply temporal steadiness. Indeed, in Sections 4 and 5, the spatial density of observations
is constant, while the observed grid points vary in time. This change in observed loca-
tions is accounted for by the translation equivariance of the convolution operation (e.g.,
Cohen et al., 2019); i.e., features can be extracted by convolution independently of ob-
served locations. This implies that the local equivariance improves the generalizability
for changes in observation data. For instance, there may be cases where the stationar-
ity is broken globally but preserved locally, such as in the expansion of observation net-
works. Various equivariant NNs have recently been studied (e.g., Cohen et al., 2019; Sos-
novik et al., 2021), including graph NNs (Fuchs et al., 2020). Such an advanced archi-
tecture will need to be incorporated into 4D-SRDA for practical applications where ob-
servations are not stationary.
2.3 A Case of Supervised Learning
In this study, the NN involved in 4D-SRDA is trained using an offline supervised
learning method. Offline means that training data are generated in advance from LR fluid
simulations in which the NN inference is not considered; in other words, the feedback
from the NN to the LR fluid model is not considered in the offline training. Supervised
learning requires HR target data that can be interpreted as the true state of the atmo-
sphere or ocean. In practice, such data can be obtained from HR reanalysis datasets. Thus,
in the case of supervised learning, 4D-SRDA is a computationally efficient alternative
for generating the HR reanalysis.
Figure 2b describes the supervised learning that corresponds to the inference in Fig-
ure 2a. Consider the target variables, namely the HR time series YHR(k∆tHR) (k= 0, . . . , N ),
where each snapshot YHRis defined on the HR spatial grid points. Training datasets
are created at a constant interval of ∆ tLR, which is equal to the assimilation interval in
the inference phase (Figure 2a). Here, we explain the generation of a sample of the dataset
for reference time t0. The initial condition for the LR fluid model is given by resizing
–8–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
the HR snapshot YHR(t0−∆tLR) by an algebraic method, such as linear interpolation.
This initial condition is interpreted as the analysis state from the previous assimilation
cycle. The LR fluid model is then numerically integrated from t0−∆tLRtot0+∆tLR
to obtain a time series of the LR states XLR, as in Equation 1. For observations, since
the target variables are obtained from the HR reanalysis dataset, the same observations
used to produce this reanalysis can be utilized in the training. By using spatio-temporal
interpolation, the observations OHRare generated at t0−∆tLRandt0, as in Equation
2. Consequently, the pair of the input and output is given by
h
{XLR(t0+i∆tLR)}i=−1,0,1,{OHR(t0+j∆tLR)}j=−1,0
,{YHR(t0+k∆tHR)}k=−4,...,4i
.
(4)
Training data generation is repeated by varying t0at a constant interval of ∆ tLR. When
optimizing the NN, the inference is computed as in Equation 3, and the NN weights are
updated based on the gradients of a given loss function.
The generation of the initial condition for the LR fluid model is different between
the inference and training phases (Figure 2). Specifically, in the inference phase, the ini-
tial condition is obtained from the previous NN inference, while in the training phase,
it is obtained from the HR target data. This difference results in a domain shift (e.g.,
Moreno-Torres et al., 2012), namely a statistical difference in the input time series of LR
statesXLR, which can be detrimental to 4D-SRDA performance. Indeed, a domain shift
is inevitable in offline training because the training data are generated in advance inde-
pendently of the NN inference. As a potential solution, we present a novel technique, SR-
mixup.
3 Super-Resolution Mixup (SR-mixup)
SR-mixup is a data augmentation method for domain generalization. The algorithm
can be applied to ordinary SR problems; thus, the following discussion is independent
of 4D-SRDA. Before explaining SR-mixup, we will review the mixup method (Zhang et
al., 2018; Yao et al., 2022).
Mixup is a data augmentation method for supervised classification problems (Zhang
et al., 2018). Consider a training dataset {(X(k), Y(k))}D
k=1(D∈N), where X(k)is a
numerical array, such as an image, and Y(k)is the corresponding class label based on
one-hot encoding. A linear combination is considered for two randomly sampled pairs,
(X(i), Y(i)) and ( X(j), Y(j)):
˜X=λX(i)+ (1−λ)X(j), (5)
˜Y=λY(i)+ (1−λ)Y(j), (6)
where the interpolation ratio λ∈[0,1] is drawn from a beta distribution B(a, b) (a, b∈
R+). Supervised learning is performed for the mixed sample ( ˜X,˜Y). Mixup is applied
only during training, and not during the test phase. The random linear combination gen-
erates synthetic samples with a different distribution from the original training data. This
mixing is expected to enhance robustness to domain shifts.
–9–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Several variants of mixup have been proposed (e.g., Verma et al., 2019; Mancini
et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2022), most of which are intended for classification. Yao et al.
(2022) proposed a mixup for regression, C-Mixup, to address the issue that the linear-
ity imposed via mixup reduces the accuracy of regression models when data are highly
nonlinear. In C-Mixup, the linear combination in Equations 5 and 6 is created for sim-
ilar randomly sampled pairs, where the similarity is measured using a distance metric
between the labels Y(i)andY(j).
SR-mixup is based on C-Mixup. Super-resolution problems are treated as regres-
sion when SR models are trained via supervised learning (e.g., Dong et al., 2014). In such
cases, the input Xis an LR image and the output Yis the corresponding HR image. The
linear combination of similar HR images results in blurred images. Because the purpose
of SR is to improve the resolution and clarity of LR images, C-Mixup may not be suit-
able for training SR models. We propose applying C-Mixup only to the input LR im-
age. This method is called SR-mixup to emphasize the mixup for SR. Similarity is de-
termined from the input Xinstead of Y. SR-mixup is applicable to both supervised and
unsupervised learning because the pairing between XandYis not required.
The SR-mixup algorithm consists of four steps and is employed only during train-
ing. Here, we explain the algorithm in a supervised setting, which is similar for unsu-
pervised applications. First, a pair ( X(i), Y(i)) is drawn from the training dataset. Sec-
ond, nother pairs are randomly sampled, and pair ( X(j), Y(j)) is further extracted such
that the Euclidean distance between X(i)andX(j)is the minimum. We adopted Eu-
clidean distance as the dissimilarity measure, although other metrics can be used. Third,
an interpolation ratio λis drawn from the beta distribution B(a, b). Fourth, a linear com-
bination of inputs is created, ˜X(i)=λX(i)+ (1−λ)X(j), resulting in the augmented
pair ( ˜X(i), Y(i)). The above four steps are repeated to generate a batch of data for op-
timizing the NN. The pairing of XandYis not essential, because the augmented input
˜X(i)is produced independently from the labels Y(i)andY(j). The parameters were set
ton= 20 for the random sampling in the second step and a=b= 2 for the beta dis-
tribution B(a, b) in the third step. Note that these parameters are context specific. In
the present setting, X(i)andX(j)are regarded as statistically symmetric based on the
symmetry of the beta distribution B(a, b)|a=b=2. This symmetry is discussed in Section
4.3.
4 Methods
Numerical experiments were performed to confirm the effectiveness of 4D-SRDA
and SR-mixup. Specifically, we simulated idealized barotropic ocean jets and then con-
ducted supervised learning. Hereafter, 4D-SRDA is referred to as ST-SRDA (spatio-temporal
SRDA) because the barotropic jet was modeled as a two-dimensional flow and the sum
of the spatial and temporal dimensions is not four.
–10–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
4.1 Fluid Simulation
An idealized barotropic ocean jet was simulated in a two-dimensional periodic chan-
nel (David et al., 2017). The equatorial beta plane ( x, y) was utilized, where x∈[0,2π]
andy∈[0, π] are the zonal and meridional coordinates, respectively. The governing equa-
tions are as follows:
∂ω
∂t+u∂ω
∂x+v∂ω
∂y+βv=−rω−ν∆2ω−dτ(y)
dy, (7)
∆ψ=ω, (8)
(u, v) =
−∂ψ
∂y,∂ψ
∂x
. (9)
Equation 7 describes the evolution of vorticity ωwith respect to time t, where the left-
hand side represents the advection of ωand the beta effect, and the right-hand side con-
sists of linear drag, hyperviscosity, and forcing due to zonal wind stress τ(y). Equations
8 and 9 give the stream function ψand velocity ( u, v), respectively. Wind stress τ(y) is
given by
τ(y) =τ0
sech2y−y0
δ
−c
, (10)
where cis determined such that the integral of τ(y) is zero. The parameters in the gov-
erning equations were set as follows: β= 0.1,r= 1×10−2,ν= 1×10−5,τ0= 0.3,
y0=π/2, and δ= 0.4. According to David et al. (2017), this configuration is within
the parameter regime of mixing barriers with strong eddies, where coherent vortices re-
main in a statistically steady state (Section 5.1). The presence of these vortices simpli-
fies the evaluation because the phase of vorticity, namely the large-scale flow structure,
is related to errors in inference.
The initial condition was a superposition of a zonal jet and random perturbations.
The zonal jet U(y) is given by
U(y) =U0
sech2y−y0
δ
−c
, (11)
where U0= 3.0. This initial jet satisfies the Rayleigh-Kuo inflection-point criterion, i.e.,
β−d2U(y)
dy2being 0 somewhere in the domain, which is a necessary condition for barotropic
instability. The perturbations were added to the vorticity field for each wavenumber, where
the phase and amplitude were sampled from Gaussian distributions with means of 0 and
standard deviations of πfor the phase and 2 .5×10−3for the amplitude. The simula-
tion data for deep learning were generated by varying the random perturbations.
Numerical integration was performed using the modified Euler and pseudo-spectral
methods. Three different resolutions were adopted: LR, HR, and ultra-HR (UHR). All
configurations are summarized in Table 1. The integration time was from t= 0 to 24
for all experiments.
–11–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Table 1. Fluid simulation configurations for three different resolutions.
Name Grid size
(x×y)Cutoff wavenumberIntegration
time stepOutput
time step
LR (low resolution) 32 ×16 10 5 ×10−41.00 (= ∆ tLR)
HR (high resolution) 128 ×64 421
4×5×10−40.25 (= ∆ tHR)
UHR (ultra-high resolution) 1024 ×512 3411
32×5×10−40.25 (= ∆ tHR)
4.2 Neural Network in the ST-SRDA System
The calculation process in the NN is simplified for potential application to three-
dimensional flows. In particular, the temporal SR is separated from the spatial SR; that
is, the temporal SR is performed in the nonlinear mapper, while the spatial SR is con-
ducted in the decoder. In addition, the encoder and decoder act independently on the
state at each time.
Figure 3 outlines the network architecture, which is based on U-Net (Ronneberger
et al., 2015). U-Net architectures have been employed in the SR for fluid systems (e.g.,
Jiang et al., 2020; L. Wang et al., 2021; Hammoud et al., 2022). The input and output
of the NN are vorticity fields. Compared with Figure 1, this NN does not include a trans-
formation from point-cloud to grid-point data because the observations are defined on
the HR spatial grid points (Equations 2 and 3). Hyperparameters, such as the number
of hidden layers, were tuned via a grid search. These parameters are presented in Ap-
pendix A. Details on the implementation of the NN are available at the Zenodo repos-
itory (see Open Research).
The encoder consists of four downsampling blocks. Each block begins with a con-
volution operation with a 2 ×2 stride and halves the spatial size of the input array in
thexandydimensions. The LR model states are spatially resized using nearest neigh-
bor interpolation to match the HR (“Resize (x,y)” in Figure 3) and then encoded while
being combined with the observations. Additionally, the observations are independently
encoded.
The nonlinear mapper contains five transformer-encoding blocks (Vaswani et al.,
2017). The time interval of the input features is refined via linear interpolation to match
the HR time steps (“Resize (t)” in Figure 3). This interpolation, followed by the non-
linear mapping, performs the temporal SR. The output from each transformer block is
passed to the next, and the encoded observations are input to all blocks. Each block first
computes weights for the input features across every time step pair and then outputs the
weighted sums of the features. This processing, known as the scaled dot-product atten-
tion, incorporates temporal correlations into the nonlinear mapping (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Niu et al., 2021). Finally, the encoded LR model states are added to the output via a
skip connection.
The decoder comprises four upsampling blocks. Each block utilizes pixel shuffle (Shi
et al., 2016) to double the spatial size of the input array in the xandydimensions. Us-
–12–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Conv2D-2
Conv2D-3ReLU
ReLU
Downsampling
BlockUpsampling
BlockConv2D-4
LeakyReLU
Shuffle
Conv2D-5
LeakyReLUInference ω
(HR)Upsample-2Upsample-1
Upsample-4Upsample-3Transformer
TransformerTransformerTransformer
TransformerObservation ω
(HR, missing)
Conv2D-1
Resize (t)Downsample-1
Downsample-2
Downsample-3
Downsample-4Model state ω
(LR)
Resize (x,y) 
Conv2D-1
Resize (t)Downsample-1
Downsample-2
Downsample-3
Downsample-4
Conv2D-6
LeakyReLU
Conv2D-7ConcatResize (x, y , t)Encoder Non-linear mapper Decoder
Block 1Block 2Block 3
Figure 3. Neural network architecture of the spatio-temporal SRDA (ST-SRDA) system. The
symbol ωdenotes vorticity fields. The blocks “Downsample” and “Upsample” are described in
the bottom right corner. In the upsampling block, the label “Shuffle” refers to the pixel shuffle
layer (Shi et al., 2016). If two or three arrows point to a block, all inputs are concatenated and
then fed to the first layer in the block. Details about the implementation are available at the
Zenodo repository (see Open Research). Outputs from Block 1 through 3 are shown in Figure 8.
ing these four blocks, the spatial size of the output is restored to the HR grid size. The
obtained output is concatenated with the features extracted by the first convolution in
the NN, which are resized using linear interpolation along the space and time axes (“Re-
size (x,y,t)” in Figure 3). The final inference is given through the last three convolution
and nonlinear layers.
In preprocessing, the vorticity at each grid point is transformed by the following
formula:
clip[0,1]ω−m
s
. (12)
The clipping function, defined as clip[0,1](z) = min {1,max{0, z}}(z∈R), limits the
value range to [0 ,1]. This function acts independently on each element of the input ar-
ray. Parameters mandswere determined such that 99.999% of the vorticity values were
within the range of [0 ,1]. As a result of this preprocessing, 0 was considered a missing
value and was substituted onto the HR grid points without observations.
4.3 Training and Testing Methods for the Neural Network
The training and testing methods for the NN are based on Sections 2.3 and 2.2,
respectively. The relationship for the data along the time axis is the same as in Figure
2, where ∆ tLR= 1.00 and ∆ tHR= 0.25. The assimilation interval is ∆ tLR, which is
approximately half of the advection time scale 2 π/U 0.
–13–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
The training was performed using the HR simulation data, whereas in the test phase,
ST-SRDA performance was evaluated with the UHR simulation results. The ST-SRDA
is a surrogate scheme for generating HR reanalysis in the case of supervised learning (Sec-
tion 2.3). In the training phase, the HR simulation data are considered to be derived from
a reanalysis, while in the test phase, the UHR data are interpreted as the true state of
the barotropic ocean jet system. The spatio-temporal resolution of the ST-SRDA out-
put is always HR (Table 1); in the test, performance was measured by mapping the HR
inference to UHR via bicubic interpolation. For comparison, EnKFs were applied to the
LR and HR fluid models. The latter, EnKF at the HR, is interpreted as a model that
generates the HR training data and is expected to provide a lower error bound for the
ST-SRDA (The EnKFs are described in Section 4.4).
The scale factor for the SR is 4 in both the spatial and temporal dimensions (i.e.,
x,y, and t). The target variable is a part of the HR vorticity time series, comprising nine
data points with a time step of ∆ tHR(= 0.25) (Figure 2b). The first four points are in-
terpreted as the past, the middle point the present, and the last four points the future.
The corresponding inputs to the NN are the time series of the observations and LR fluid-
model states. The observations consist of two points in time, whereas the LR states con-
sist of three points (Figure 2b). The time interval of both input time series is ∆ tLR(=
1.0). This configuration means that the NN performs the temporal SR with a factor of
4. Since the LR spatial grids (32 ×16) are four times coarser than the HR grids (128 ×
64), the spatial SR also has a factor of 4. The scale factor of 4 is sufficiently high for real
applications (Onishi et al., 2019; J. Wang et al., 2021).
Synthetic observations were generated from the HR and UHR simulations in the
training and test phases, respectively. For HR, observed grid points were randomly sub-
sampled with a constant spatial spacing. Specifically, the spatial density of observations
was constant, while observed grid points varied in time. For instance, when the vortic-
ity is observed at every 8 ×8 grids, the spatial density is approximately 1.56%. This ra-
tio is referred to as the observation point ratio, which is defined as
the total number of observed grid points
the total number of HR grid points (= 128 ×64). (13)
The sensitivity to this ratio was assessed across experiments by varying it from 0.5% to
6.5%. At the unobserved grid points, Not a Numbers (NaNs) were substituted and re-
placed in subsequent preprocessing with missing values, i.e., zeros (Section 4.2). Spatially
independent Gaussian noise was added to the subsampled vorticity, with a mean of 0 and
a standard deviation of 0 .1, which is approximately 5% of the spatio-temporal average
of the absolute values of vorticity. For UHR, the average pooling of an 8 ×8 kernel was
applied to the vorticity field to match the spatial size to that of the HR, and the above
processing was applied.
The training and validation data were generated from the HR fluid simulations (Fig-
ure 2b). All simulations were terminated at t= 24, when the barotropic jet becomes
a statistically steady state consisting of westward-propagating large-scale eddies (David
et al., 2017). To increase dataset size, the initial random perturbations were varied ran-
–14–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
domly (Section 4.1), and 3,500 and 1,000 simulations were run for the training and val-
idation dataset, respectively. Each HR simulation contained 23 LR-simulation cycles be-
cause of ∆ tLR= 1 (i.e., t0= 1, . . . , 23). In each cycle, the initial condition for the LR
fluid model was given by applying a low-pass filter to the HR vorticity in the wavenum-
ber domain. The total size of the training and validation dataset was 80,500 (= 3 ,500×
23) and 23,000 (= 1 ,000×23), respectively.
The NN was trained by employing SR-mixup and Adam optimization (Kingma &
Ba, 2015). For the loss function, we used the mean absolute error (MAE) of vorticity.
The weights of the NN that resulted in the smallest validation MAE were stored after
1,000 epochs with a mini-batch size of 32. SR-mixup was applied only to the LR model
states. SR-mixup is not necessary for the observation data, because they are indepen-
dent of the NN inference and not subject to domain shifts. If SR-mixup were applied to
data with missing values, such as observations, the linear interpolation would need to
be replaced with a nearest neighbor interpolation using a threshold against λ.
In each iteration, SR-mixup generates a synthetic time series as in Equation 5:
˜ωLR,(i)(t) = λωLR,(i)(t) + (1 −λ)ωLR,(j)(t),
=ωLR,(i)(t) + (1 −λ)(ωLR,(j)(t)−ωLR,(i)(t)), (14)
(t∈ {t0−∆tLR, t0, t0+ ∆tLR}),
where iandjdenote the data indices, and λis independent of tand sampled from the
beta distribution B(a, b)|a=b=2. Equation 14 is interpreted as the original time series ωLR,(i)(t)
being perturbed by a time series ωLR,(j)(t) that is similar to ωLR,(i)(t) in terms of Eu-
clidean distance (Section 3). In training, ˜ ωLR,(i)(t) was used as input instead of ωLR,(i)(t).
The beta distribution B(a, b) was set to be symmetric (i.e., a=b= 2) to increase the
perturbation amplitude. The grid-wise relative error between two similar LR time se-
ries was found to be quite small ( ≲10%) due to the sufficiently large dataset size. As
the dataset size decreases, the difference between ωLR,(i)andωLR,(j)tends to increase,
suggesting that λneeds to be biased toward 1, i.e., an asymmetric beta distribution is
required to suppress the perturbation amplitude. Note that SR-mixup partially breaks
the dynamical consistency in the LR time series; for instance, nonlinear conserved quan-
tities, such as energy, are not constant in time. On the other hand, the linearity of SR-
mixup indicates that linear constraints, such as Equations 8 and 9, are preserved because
all physical quantities are linearly superposed by using the same weight of λ. Mixup, in-
cluding SR-mixup, is a simple method for domain generalization (Zhang et al., 2018; Yao
et al., 2022). Advanced methods, such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) (e.g.,
J. Wang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022) may improve dynamical consistency.
The test method is the same as the inference method in Figure 2a, which repeats
the feedback cycle between the NN and fluid model. In the first cycle, the initial con-
dition for the LR fluid model was given by a superposition of random perturbations and
the zonal jet (Equation 11) because of no NN inference, while in later cycles, the initial
condition was obtained by applying the low-pass filter to the NN inference. Since the
initial perturbations in the first cycle were random, the vorticity evolution would be largely
–15–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
different even using the HR fluid model. Here, 50 UHR simulations were performed to
generate the ground-truth data. The following results were not sensitive to the number
of UHR simulations (similar results were found even for 5 UHR simulations).
ST-SRDA performance was evaluated using two metrics, namely pixel-wise accu-
racy and pattern consistency, for the time series that consists of the analysis and fore-
cast values. The ST-SRDA output includes the past, present, and future (Figure 2a).
All vorticity time series evaluated in Section 5 were created as follows: in each assim-
ilation cycle, the inferences between t0andt0+3∆tHR(i.e., four time points) were ex-
tracted; after all cycles, all extracted values were combined into one time series.
The MAE ratio measures pixel-wise errors as follows:
MAE ratio at t=1
NNX
i=1P
UHR space |ω(i)(t)−ˆω(i)(t)|P
UHR space|ω(i)(t)|, (15)
where Nis the number of test simulations ( N= 50), ω(i)(t) is the ground-truth UHR
vorticity in the i-th simulation, and ˆ ω(i)(t) is the corresponding HR inference of ST-SRDA.
The spatial size was matched by resizing the HR inference to the UHR grid space via
bicubic interpolation.
The consistency of the spatial patterns was estimated using the mean structural
similarity index measure (MSSIM) (Z. Wang et al., 2004):
MSSIM loss at t= 1−MSSIM( t)
= 1−1
NX
iX
UHR space 
2µ(i)(t)ˆµ(i)(t) + C 12 
2γ(i)(t) + C 22
 
µ(i)(t)2+ ˆµ(i)(t)2+ C 12 
σ(i)(t)2+ ˆσ(i)(t)2+ C 22,(16)
where C 1= 0.01, C 2= 0.03,µ(i)(t) and σ(i)(t)2are the mean and variance of the ground
truth, respectively; ˆ µ(i)(t) and ˆ σ(i)(t)2are the corresponding quantities of the ST-SRDA
inference; and γ(i)(t) is the covariance between the ground truth and inference. The vari-
ables in the summation are calculated locally by applying a Gaussian filter; for instance,
when computing the second moment, the Gaussian filter is applied to each vorticity field
after squaring the vorticity value at each grid point. We confirmed that MSSIM losses
are not sensitive to the window function. Indeed, similar results were found when a rect-
angular window was employed instead of the Gaussian. The MSSIM loss takes a value
greater than or equal to 0, and smaller values indicate that the spatial patterns of in-
ference are more similar to those of the ground truth. A detailed discussion of MSSIM
can be found in Z. Wang et al. (2004).
The MAE ratio and MSSIM loss were calculated for each time t, as shown in Equa-
tions 15 and 16. The time-averaged values are referenced using the same names.
The evaluation in the test phase was conducted using an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU
on a local workstation. The NN training was performed using four NVIDIA Tesla P100
GPUs on the TSUBAME3.0 supercomputer at the Tokyo Institute of Technology.
–16–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
4.4 Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF)
An EnKF (Evensen, 1994) with the perturbed observation method (Burgers et al.,
1998) was applied to the HR or LR fluid model. The former, referred to as EnKF-HR,
is considered to provide a lower bound on the errors for the ST-SRDA because the un-
derlying HR fluid model is the same as that used to generate the training data. The EnKF
applied to the LR fluid model is referred to as EnKF-SR, which is a baseline model for
the ST-SRDA. In EnKF-SR, the assimilation is performed in the HR space after the LR
fluid-model state is super-resolved to the HR by bicubic interpolation. Barth´ el´ emy et
al. (2022) reported that performing the EnKF in the HR space may provide more ac-
curate inferences than those in the LR space when observations are defined on the HR
grid points. When the EnKF is applied in the LR space, several observations may need
to be combined into a single point because of the coarser spatial resolution. The EnKF
in the HR space does not require such aggregation, suggesting that the observation data
are fully utilized. For both EnKF-HR and EnKF-SR, the initial condition for the fluid
model was given by a superposition of random perturbations and the zonal jet (Equa-
tion 11) as in testing with the ST-SRDA, and the assimilation was performed at the con-
stant interval ∆ tLR, i.e., the same interval of the ST-SRDA inference (Figure 2a). For
simplicity, the observation errors, including representativeness errors, are assumed to obey
the same statistics as described in Section 4.3 for all models (i.e., ST-SRDA, EnKF-SR,
and EnKF-HR) because the assimilation is performed through the HR space in all mod-
els.
The background error covariance matrices were spatially localized using a function
of Gaspari and Cohn (1999). These error covariances were inflated by adding Gaussian
noise to the analysis state prior to the numerical integration of the fluid model (Whitaker
et al., 2008). This Gaussian noise had a mean of 0 and incorporated spatial correlation
by estimating its covariance based on the training data at each time step. The initial per-
turbations to create ensemble members were also sampled from this Gaussian distribu-
tion at t= 0. The results were not sensitive to the Gaussian-noise covariance; similar
results were obtained when the Gaussian noise had a constant correlation length. We
also confirmed that this additive inflation provided more accurate inferences than the
multiplicative covariance inflation (Anderson & Anderson, 1999)
Hyperparameters for the EnKF-HR and EnKF-SR were determined for each ob-
servation point ratio such that the MAE was minimized using the training data. Specif-
ically, the number of ensemble members was fixed at 100, and the following hyperparam-
eters were tuned: the amplitude for the initial perturbation to create the ensemble; ad-
ditive inflation amplitude; localization radius; and amplitude for perturbing observations.
5 Results and Discussion
5.1 Accuracy of ST-SRDA Inferences
By comparing the EnKF-SR, EnKF-HR, and ST-SRDA, we will demonstrate that
the ST-SRDA successfully achieves simultaneous DA and spatio-temporal SR. The test
–17–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Figure 4. An example of vorticity evolution from the ground-truth data at ultra-high resolu-
tion (UHR).
method repeats the feedback cycle between the fluid simulation and NN inference (Fig-
ure 2a) and is equivalent to the 4D-SRDA calculation process (Figure 1).
Before making this comparison, we discuss a typical vorticity evolution from the
ground-truth UHR data (Figure 4). In the initial stage (0 ≤t≲10), the unstable jet
meanders and collapses into multiple vortices, while developing fine filaments. The vor-
tices then merge into a flow with wavenumber 1 (10 ≲t≲16), where the small-scale
structure is again enhanced ( t∼13). Finally, the wavenumber-1 vorticity continues to
propagate westward, i.e., in the negative xdirection (16 ≲t). This final state of the
coherent vortices is characteristic of the regime of mixing barriers with strong eddies and
can be understood through Rossby-wave dynamics (David et al., 2017). All fluid sim-
ulations were terminated at t= 24 (Section 4.3) because no fine-scale pattern devel-
oped in this statistically steady state.
The ST-SRDA successfully inferred both the small- and large-scale structures in
the vorticity fields. Figure 5 compares the ground truth with the EnKF-SR, EnKF-HR,
and ST-SRDA inferences. At t= 7, the wavenumber-2 structure developed and was
associated with the collapse of the jet stream (Figure 4). The ST-SRDA and EnKF-HR
emulated this collapse with high accuracy; in particular, both reproduced the small-scale
structures within the positive and negative vortices. Although the EnKF-SR inferred the
vortex locations, it failed to reproduce the fine-scale patterns inside the vortices. At t=
13, the results were similar to those at t= 7: the vortex merging was successfully em-
ulated by the ST-SRDA and EnKF-HR, but not by the EnKF-SR. At t= 23, the large-
scale coherent vortices propagated westward, and all models successfully inferred the phase
of vorticity, i.e., the large-scale pattern. Overall, the ST-SRDA inferred vorticity fields
that were similar to those of the EnKF-HR.
The quantitative analysis indicated that the ST-SRDA inference tended to be more
accurate than the EnKF-SR inference at all time points. Figure 6 shows the time series
of the MAE ratio and MSSIM loss averaged over all of the test simulations. All scores
were calculated in the UHR space, with LR and HR vorticity fields mapped to the UHR
space via bicubic interpolation. The results were not sensitive to this mapping because
a similar time series set was obtained when all of the scores were calculated in the LR
–18–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
/gid00008/gid00045/gid00042/gid00048/gid00041/gid00031/gid00001/gid00047/gid00045/gid00048/gid00047/gid00035 /gid00006/gid00041/gid00012/gid00007/gid00496/gid00020/gid00019 /gid00006/gid00041/gid00012/gid00007/gid00496/gid00009/gid00019 /gid00020/gid00021/gid00496/gid00020/gid00019/gid00005/gid00002/gid00047/gid00001/gid00715/gid00001/gid00428 /gid00047/gid00001/gid00715/gid00001/gid00422/gid00424 /gid00047/gid00001/gid00715/gid00001/gid00423/gid00424
Figure 5. Vorticity snapshots from the ground-truth data and EnKF-SR, EnKF-HR, and ST-
SRDA inferences. The black dots in the ground truth represent the observed grid points. Their
ratio (1 .56%) was calculated according to Equation 13. The mean absolute error (MAE) ratio is
defined by Equation 15.
or HR space. All time series in Figure 6 are based on the analysis and forecast values
of the vorticity. Since the assimilation intervals (∆ tLR= 1.00) were the same for all
models, the MAE ratio and MSSIM loss were reduced at the same time points. The time
series of the ST-SRDA (orange solid lines) are missing for 0 ≤t <1 because no fore-
cast was inferred during this initial period (Section 4.3). On average, the MAE ratio and
MSSIM loss of the ST-SRDA were smaller than those of the EnKF-SR (green dashed
lines), but larger than those of the EnKF-HR (blue dotted lines). This verifies that the
EnKF-HR provides a lower bound on the errors for the ST-SRDA. The time series of the
EnKF-SR have two peaks around t= 7 and 13 (vertical lines). These peaks reflect the
development of fine-scale patterns due to jet stream collapse ( t∼7) and vortex merg-
ing (t∼13) (Figures 4 and 5). These two peaks are observed for the MSSIM loss of
the ST-SRDA and EnKF-HR (Figure 6b), but are not clear for their MAE ratios (Fig-
ure 6a). This result is likely due to the fact that the MAE ratio is a pixel-wise error and
not sensitive to differences in flow patterns (e.g., Z. Wang et al., 2004). After the vor-
tex merging (13 ≲t), the MAE ratio and MSSIM loss decreased, while the flow field
approached the statistically steady large-scale state. This result is plausible as it is rel-
atively easy to infer large-scale flow patterns.
The accuracy of the ST-SRDA was comparable to that of the EnKF-HR with sparse
observations. Figure 7 shows the dependence of the MAE ratio and MSSIM loss on the
observation point ratio. The error bars represent the standard deviations based on all
50 test simulations. Both errors of the ST-SRDA (orange solid lines) are smaller than
those of the EnKF-SR (green dashed lines), but larger than those of the EnKF-HR (blue
dotted lines), as in Figure 6. For all the models, the means and standard deviations of
the test scores tended to increase as observations became sparser. In particular, the er-
ror bars of the EnKF-HR were so large that they overlapped with those of the ST-SRDA
–19–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Figure 6. Time series of the test scores: (a) mean absolute error (MAE) ratio and (b) mean
structural similarity index measure (MSSIM) loss. The MAE ratio and MSSIM loss are defined
by Equation 15 and 16, respectively. The observation point ratio was set to 1 .56%, as in Figure
5. The vertical lines represent t= 7, 13, and 23. The inferences at these times are shown in
Figure 5. The assimilation interval is ∆ tLR= 1.00 for all the models.
Figure 7. Dependence of the test scores on the observation point ratio: (a) mean absolute
error (MAE) ratio and (b) mean structural similarity index measure (MSSIM) loss. The MAE
ratio and MSSIM loss are defined by Equation 15 and 16, respectively. The test scores were aver-
aged over 4 ≤t≤20. The observation point ratio was calculated according to Equation 13. The
error bars show the standard deviations from all 50 test simulations. The vertical lines denotes
an observation ratio of 1.56%, which is the same as in Figures 5 and 6.
at an observation point ratio of 0.69%. This implies that the accuracy of the ST-SRDA
is relatively robust and becomes comparable to that of the EnKF-HR when observations
are sparse.
The computation time of ST-SRDA was much shorter than that of EnKF-SR and
EnKF-HR. Table 2 compares the average wall times of all the models. For reference, the
table also lists the wall times of the underlying HR and LR fluid models. The wall time
of the ST-SRDA was approximately 22% and 1.3% of that of the EnKF-SR and the EnKF-
HR, respectively, which highlights the computational efficiency of ST-SRDA.
5.2 Features for Observations Including Missing Values
In general, NNs can learn data representations suitable for specific problems (e.g.,
Bengio et al., 2013; Zeiler & Fergus, 2014). Here, it is interesting to examine the rep-
resentations for the observation data because of missing values. We show that the spa-
tial range with the influence of observed grid points can increase in deeper layers.
–20–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Table 2. Average wall times of all the models for the vorticity evolution over 0 ≤t≤24. The
EnKF-SR and ST-SRDA employ the low-resolution (LR) fluid model to calculate the time evolu-
tion, while the EnKF-HR employs the high-resolution (HR) fluid model. The number of ensemble
members for the EnKF-SR and EnKF-HR was set to 100. All the calculations, including the NN
inference, were performed using a single process of an Intel Xeon Gold 6242R CPU.
Model name Wall time [s]
HR fluid model 696.3
LR fluid model 28.9
EnKF-HR 4415.6
EnKF-SR 262.5
ST-SRDA 57.2
/gid00422/gid00423/gid00429/gid00427/gid00425
 /gid00422/gid00427
/gid00424/gid00423/gid00424/gid00423
/gid00427/gid00425/gid00427/gid00425
/gid00422/gid00423/gid00429
Figure 8. Features extracted from the observation data. The far-left panel shows a ground-
truth snapshot, where the black dots represent the observed grid points. Since the average pool-
ing is applied to the UHR data to generate the synthetic observations, the panel shows the
ground-truth snapshot blurred by average pooling. In the observation data, the unobserved
points were filled with the missing values, i.e., zeros (Section 4.3). The other panels show the
features extracted from the observations. These features are outputs from Block 1 through 3 in
Figure 3. The feature magnitudes are normalized to 1. Each number along the vertical or lateral
axis denotes the data size.
Figure 8 shows features extracted from the observation data that appear to be ex-
plainable. These features are outputs from Block 1 through 3 in Figure 3 and have smaller
spatial sizes in the deeper layers due to the U-Net architecture. In these feature fields,
small background values may reflect missing values, while the larger values are interpreted
as representations of each observed point. The wavenumber-2 structure in the ground
truth becomes more obvious in deeper-level features (Figure 8). This implies that the
observed grid points may have a larger spatial influence in deeper layers.
In the fourth panel, “Feature (Block 3)” is quite low near the center, which seems
to coincide with the negative vortex in the first panel (ground truth). Moreover, this fea-
ture exhibits similar low values near unobserved points. These findings suggest that the
NN has difficulty distinguishing between the missing values and minimum normalized
vorticity, as both are represented by zeros (Section 4.2). The differentiation can be achieved
by introducing binary masks, which are frequently employed in image inpainting (e.g.,
G. Liu et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019). These masks assign 0 to unobserved grid points and
1 to observed points. Even if the missing and minimum observed values are the same,
the binary mask enables the NN to distinguish between them. The image inpainting tech-
niques may be beneficial for future studies.
–21–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
5.3 Robustness of ST-SRDA Inferences
Here, we demonstrate that the domain shift can reduce the accuracy of ST-SRDA
and SR-mixup mitigates this degradation. The domain shift occurs due to the difference
in the calculation process between the test and training phases. In the test phase, the
NN inference and LR fluid simulation are performed alternately, where the LR fluid model
is initialized by the NN inference (Section 2.2 and Figure 2a). In contrast, during the
training, the LR fluid model is initialized using the HR simulation results, and feedback
from the NN to the fluid model is not incorporated (Section 2.3 and Figure 2b). We fo-
cused only on this difference in the calculation process by using the HR instead of the
UHR ground truth. According to the training and test methods in Section 4.3, the ob-
servations were generated from the HR simulations during training, whereas they were
generated from the UHR results during testing. Thus, both the calculation process and
method of generating observations differ from those in the training phase. This exper-
imental setup is suitable for evaluating the ST-SRDA accuracy (Section 5.1), but not
for investigating the influence of domain shift. To eliminate the difference in the obser-
vations, they are generated here from the HR ground truth. The evaluation metrics (Equa-
tions 15 and 16) are then computed in the HR space. We first examined that the dif-
ference in the calculation process leads to a domain shift, namely a statistical difference
in the input of LR fluid-model states.
Figure 9 shows an example of the vorticity difference between the HR simulation
and ST-SRDA inference. In the training phase, the LR fluid model was initialized by the
low-pass filtered HR simulation results, while in the testing phase, it was initialized by
the filtered ST-SRDA inferences. The difference in the initial condition tended to be larger
for the small-scale patterns associated with jet collapse ( t= 5) and vortex merging ( t=
14), whereas the difference was smaller in the final state with large-scale vortices ( t=
22). We also confirmed that the probability density functions of vorticity values varied
significantly in terms of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, where the p-value was less than
0.006. These results indicate that the difference in the initial condition was significant,
implying that the obtained LR time series was also statistically different between the train-
ing and test phases, i.e., a domain shift occurred.
We next investigated the influence of the domain shift. For comparison, the NN
was trained without SR-mixup. Note that all results presented in Sections 5.1 and 5.2
employed SR-mixup. The NNs with and without SR-mixup were compared using the two
evaluation methods illustrated in Figure 2. The first method (Figure 2a) is the same as
the test method in Section 5.1, where the domain shift occurred. In contrast, in the sec-
ond method (Figure 2b), the domain shift does not occur because it is the same as the
method used to generate the training data. In this method, there is no feedback from
the NN inference to the LR simulation.
The domain shift potentially reduces ST-SRDA performance, but SR-mixup can
mitigate this effect. Figure 10 shows vorticity snapshots obtained using the two evalu-
ation methods. Without SR-mixup, the vorticity was accurately inferred (MAE ratio =
0.15) when no domain shift occurred (Figure 10b). However, when the feedback was in-
–22–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
/gid00009/gid00019/gid00001/gid00046/gid00036/gid00040/gid00048/gid00039/gid00028/gid00047/gid00036/gid00042/gid00041 /gid00009/gid00019/gid00001/gid00046/gid00036/gid00040/gid00048/gid00039/gid00028/gid00047/gid00036/gid00042/gid00041
/gid00506/gid00039/gid00042/gid00050/gid00496/gid00043/gid00028/gid00046/gid00046/gid00001/gid00414/gid00039/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00032/gid00031/gid00507/gid00020/gid00021/gid00496/gid00020/gid00019/gid00005/gid00002
/gid00506/gid00039/gid00042/gid00050/gid00496/gid00043/gid00028/gid00046/gid00046/gid00001/gid00414/gid00039/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00032/gid00031/gid00507/gid00009/gid00019/gid00001/gid00040/gid00036/gid00041/gid00048/gid00046/gid00001/gid00020/gid00019/gid00005/gid00002
/gid00506/gid00039/gid00042/gid00050/gid00496/gid00043/gid00028/gid00046/gid00046/gid00001/gid00414/gid00039/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00032/gid00031/gid00507/gid00047/gid00001/gid00715/gid00001/gid00426 /gid00047/gid00001/gid00715/gid00001/gid00422/gid00425 /gid00047/gid00001/gid00715/gid00001/gid00423/gid00423
Figure 9. An example of the vorticity difference between the HR simulation and ST-SRDA
inference. In the training phase, the LR fluid model was initialized by the low-pass filtered HR
data, while in the testing phase, it was initialized by the filtered ST-SRDA inferences. The
far-right panels show the differences between these two initial conditions. For reference, the
unfiltered HR data are shown in the far-left panels.
corporated, i.e., the domain shift occurred (Figure 10a), the vortex shapes were completely
different from those in the ground truth, resulting in a higher MAE ratio (= 1 .44). In
contrast, when SR-mixup was employed, the inferences were not strongly dependent on
the presence or absence of the domain shift (Figures 10a and 10b, respectively). These
results indicate that SR-mixup makes the inference robust to statistical differences in
the input.
The effect of SR-mixup was further examined by varying the observation point ra-
tio (Figure 11). Without SR-mixup, the MAE ratio was substantially higher over the
entire range of the observation point ratio when the domain shift occurred (dashed line
in Figure 11a). In contrast, using SR-mixup, the increase in the MAE ratio was suppressed,
and the MAE ratio was almost independent of the domain shift (solid lines in Figures
11a and 11b). Interestingly, when the feedback was not incorporated (Figure 11b), the
MAE ratio was slightly higher with SR-mixup than without SR-mixup. During the train-
ing phase, SR-mixup added perturbations to the LR input (Equation 14), whereas in the
evaluation for Figure 11b, such perturbations were not added, and the LR initial con-
dition was generated directly from the HR data. Thus, the training without SR-mixup
resulted in smaller MAE ratios. However, this evaluation method is virtual because the
LR fluid model is always initialized by the HR data; the inclusion of the feedback cy-
cle is more realistic (Figure 11a).
Furthermore, SR-mixup reduced the sensitivity of inference to the NN-weight ini-
tialization, as shown by the error bars in Figure 11. In general, the NN inference can be
influenced by randomly initialized weights (e.g., Bengio, 2012; Picard, 2021). To assess
this sensitivity, we trained the NN five times while changing the random seed for the weight
–23–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Figure 10. Vorticity snapshots from the ground truth and the inference of the ST-SRDA
with and without SR-mixup; in (a), the feedback cycle was repeated for evaluation (Figure 2a),
while in (b), there was no feedback cycle (Figure 2b). Only one snapshot of the ground truth is
presented because it does not depend on the use of SR-mixup or the evaluation methods. The
black dots in the ground-truth snapshot represent the observation points. The ratio (1.56%) was
calculated according to Equation 13.
initializer (He et al., 2015). The error bars in the figure show the maxima and minima
of the MAE ratios from these five experiments. When the domain shift did not occur,
the error bars were quite small, regardless of SR-mixup (Figure 11b). In contrast, when
the domain shift occurred, the error bars were significantly larger without SR-mixup (dashed
line in Figure 11a). Therefore, SR-mixup suppressed the sensitivity and promoted the
stability of the inference.
The MAE ratio without SR-mixup was saturated at an observation point ratio of
0.56%, resulting in the small error bar (purple) in Figure 11a. For comparison, we con-
ducted the LR fluid simulation without DA or SR, which was expected to give an up-
per error bound for the ST-SRDA. Figure 12 compares the time series of the MAE ra-
tio when the observation point ratio is 0.56%. As expected, the MAE ratio of the ST-
SRDA without SR-mixup was comparable to that of the LR simulation, both of which
were much larger than that of the ST-SRDA with SR-mixup. In particular, the error grew
rapidly in the initial period ( t≲4). Similar error growth was observed at the other ob-
servation point ratios, i.e., with denser observations. During the initial period, the jet
stream collapses while developing fine-scale vorticity filaments (Figure 4), which can en-
hance the domain shift (Figure 9). This could explain the rapid error growth without
SR-mixup found in Figure 12.
–24–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Figure 11. Dependence of the mean absolute error (MAE) ratio on the observation-point
ratio with and without SR-mixup; in (a), the feedback cycle was repeated (Figure 2a), while in
(b), there was no feedback cycle (Figure 2b). The MAE ratio is defined by Equation 15, and the
values were averaged over time. The error bars show the maxima and minima of the MAE ratios
from five experiments where the random seed for the initializer of neural-network weights was
varied.
Figure 12. Time series of the test scores: (a) mean absolute error (MAE) ratio and (b) mean
structural similarity index measure (MSSIM) loss. The MAE ratio and MSSIM loss are defined
by Equation 15 and 16, respectively. The observation point ratio was set to 0.56%. For compari-
son, the LR simulation was conducted without SR or DA, and its time series are labeled “LR (no
SR/DA).”
Finally, we discuss three possible reasons why domain-generalization techniques have
rarely been applied to fluid systems, including the atmosphere and ocean (Brunton et
al., 2020; Duraisamy, 2021; Kashinath et al., 2021). First, despite the reduced accuracy
due to domain shift, the NN inference can remain more accurate than that of baselines,
making domain-generalization methods less necessary. Second, loss functions that include
physics-based terms, such as the residuals of the governing equations, can act as regu-
larizers that improve generalizability (e.g., Jiang et al., 2020; C. Wang et al., 2020; Bao
et al., 2022; Hammoud et al., 2022). Third, incorporating geometric symmetries as prior
knowledge can enhance the generalization performance (e.g., Ling et al., 2016; R. Wang
et al., 2021; Chattopadhyay et al., 2022; Yasuda & Onishi, 2023a). Further research is
needed to evaluate the validity of these factors. As we have demonstrated, domain shifts
can occur when NNs are incorporated into physics-based models, thereby reducing ac-
curacy. By utilizing domain-generalization techniques (e.g., J. Wang et al., 2022; Zhou
et al., 2022), even in the three cases described here, it may be possible to further improve
the robustness of NNs and extend their applicability to different systems.
–25–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
6 Conclusions
This study proposes a four-dimensional super-resolution data assimilation (4D-SRDA)
scheme. This scheme employs a physics-based model to calculate the time evolution of
a system using low-resolution (LR) simulations. The resulting time series of LR model
states, along with observations, are fed into a trained neural network (NN). This NN si-
multaneously performs data assimilation (DA) and spatio-temporal super-resolution (SR),
generating flow fields with high spatio-temporal resolution. A snapshot of these high-
resolution (HR) flow fields is considered the analysis and projected onto the LR grid points
via algebraic operations, such as linear interpolation. Using this LR analysis, an LR sim-
ulation is conducted for the next assimilation cycle. 4D-SRDA does not require ensem-
ble evolution or iterative calculations, making it computationally efficient.
In the 4D-SRDA system, the NN is trained via supervised or unsupervised learn-
ing, in which a domain shift, namely a statistical difference between the training and test
data, can affect the performance of the system (e.g., Moreno-Torres et al., 2012). In gen-
eral, when physics-based simulations and NN inferences are performed alternately and
are mutually dependent in the test phase, a domain shift will occur if the training data
are generated in advance solely by running the physics-based model (i.e., offline train-
ing).
To prevent the degradation in accuracy caused by the domain shift, we developed
a data augmentation method for domain generalization, SR-mixup, based on C-Mixup
(Yao et al., 2022). In SR-mixup, two similar inputs are randomly sampled and their lin-
ear combination is used as input to improve robustness to domain shift. Unlike C-Mixup,
the linear combination is not made for the output, to avoid producing blurred HR im-
ages in SR problems. SR-mixup is applicable to supervised and unsupervised problems
because it does not assume paired inputs and outputs.
We validated the 4D-SRDA and SR-mixup using an idealized barotropic ocean jet
(David et al., 2017) with supervised learning. Since this jet was modeled as a two-dimensional
flow, 4D-SRDA was referred to as spatio-temporal SRDA (ST-SRDA). In the case of su-
pervised learning, the ST-SRDA is regarded as a computationally efficient surrogate scheme
for generating an HR reanalysis dataset. For comparison, we applied an ensemble Kalman
filter (EnKF) to the LR or HR fluid model. The former is a baseline model for the ST-
SRDA, while the latter is considered to give a lower error bound for the ST-SRDA be-
cause the underlying HR fluid model generates the HR training data. The ST-SRDA al-
ways tended to be more accurate than the baseline, i.e., the EnKF at the LR. When the
observations were sparse, the error of the ST-SRDA became comparable to that of the
EnKF at the HR (i.e., close to a lower error bound). Furthermore, the wall time of ST-
SRDA was much shorter than that of the EnKFs. These results suggest that ST-SRDA
is effective for generating HR reanalysis at low computational cost. We also confirmed
that the error became substantially larger without SR-mixup, indicating that the com-
bination of SR-mixup and ST-SRDA is useful in achieving robust forecast cycles.
To improve the applicability of this scheme to real-world contexts, a training method
using small patches should be developed. In this study, the NN was trained based on the
–26–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Table A1. Hyperparameters in the encoder. The block and layer names are defined in Figure
3.
Block name Layer name Input channels Output channels Stride
— Conv2D-1 1 64 1
Downsample-1Conv2D-2 64 128 2
Conv2D-3 128 128 1
Downsample-2Conv2D-2 128 256 2
Conv2D-3 256 256 1
Downsample-3Conv2D-2 256 128 2
Conv2D-3 128 128 1
Downsample-4Conv2D-2 128 64 2
Conv2D-3 64 64 1
whole two-dimensional flow fields. The data size of three-dimensional flows is larger, which
requires the division of a snapshot into small patches. Training methods with small patches
have been developed in terms of DA (Ouala et al., 2018; Yang & Grooms, 2021) and may
be effective in applying 4D-SRDA to more realistic three-dimensional data.
Another direction for future work is to achieve 4D-SRDA with unsupervised learn-
ing. The proof-of-concept presented here employed supervised learning, assuming that
sufficiently accurate atmospheric or oceanic data were available in the training phase.
In practice, such data can be obtained from HR reanalysis datasets. Unsupervised set-
tings will make 4D-SRDA applicable to a broader range of conditions, in which accurate
data may not be available. Furthermore, since 4D-SRDA does not require ensembles, it
is difficult to estimate the uncertainty of the inferences. This may be improved by uti-
lizing unsupervised-learning frameworks (e.g., Krishnan et al., 2015; Fraccaro et al., 2017).
Although the numerical experiments in this paper are idealized, the super-resolution and
domain-generalization techniques presented herein provide a useful basis for future de-
velopments in the integration of data-driven and physics-based models.
Appendix A Hyperparameters of the Neural Network
We list here the hyperparameters of the NN (Figure 3), which were determined through
a grid search. Further details about the implementation are available at the Zenodo repos-
itory (see Open Research). Tables A1 and A2 list the layer-dependent hyperparameters
in the encoder and decoder, respectively. The kernel size of all convolution layers is 3.
The slope of all leaky ReLU layers is −0.01 (Maas et al., 2013). The upscale factor of
all pixel shuffle layers is 2 (Shi et al., 2016). The hyperparameters in the transformer en-
coding blocks are set as follows (Vaswani et al., 2017): the number of input features is
2048, the number of heads in the multi-head attention is 16, and the dimension of the
feed-forward network is 2048.
–27–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Table A2. Hyperparameters in the decoder. The block and layer names are defined in Figure
3.
Block name Layer name Input channels Output channels
Upsample-1Conv2D-4 64 256
Conv2D-5 64 128
Upsample-2Conv2D-4 128 512
Conv2D-5 128 256
Upsample-3Conv2D-4 256 1024
Conv2D-5 256 128
Upsample-4Conv2D-4 128 512
Conv2D-5 128 64
—Conv2D-6 192 64
Conv2D-7 64 1
Open Research
The source code used for generating all the datasets and experiments is preserved
athttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7946486 and developed openly at https://github
.com/YukiYasuda2718/4d-srda sr-mixup . The detailed information can be found in
Yasuda and Onishi (2023b).
Acknowledgments
We greatly appreciate the three anonymous reviewers, the associate editor, and the ed-
itor for their careful review and constructive feedback on the manuscript. This work was
supported by the JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Number 20H05751). This work used compu-
tational resources of the TSUBAME3.0 supercomputer provided by the Tokyo Institute
of Technology through the HPCI System Research Project (Project ID: hp220102). This
paper is based on results obtained from a project, JPNP22002, commissioned by the New
Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO).
References
Abarbanel, H. D. I., Rozdeba, P. J., & Shirman, S. (2018, 08). Machine Learning:
Deepest Learning as Statistical Data Assimilation Problems. Neural Computa-
tion,30(8), 2025-2055. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1162/neco\ a\
01094 doi: 10.1162/neco a01094
Amendola, M., Arcucci, R., Mottet, L., Casas, C. Q., Fan, S., Pain, C., . . . Guo,
Y.-K. (2021). Data assimilation in the latent space of a convolutional autoen-
coder. In Computational science – iccs 2021: 21st international conference,
krakow, poland, june 16–18, 2021, proceedings, part v (p. 373–386). Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-77977-1 30doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-77977-1 30
–28–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Anderson, J. L., & Anderson, S. L. (1999). A monte carlo implementation of
the nonlinear filtering problem to produce ensemble assimilations and fore-
casts. Monthly Weather Review ,127(12), 2741 - 2758. Retrieved from
https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/mwre/127/12/1520-0493
1999 1272741 amciot 2.0.co 2.xml doi: 10.1175/1520-0493(1999)127 ⟨2741:
AMCIOT ⟩2.0.CO;2
Anwar, S., Khan, S., & Barnes, N. (2020, may). A deep journey into super-
resolution: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. ,53(3). Retrieved from
https://doi.org/10.1145/3390462 doi: 10.1145/3390462
Asch, M., Bocquet, M., & Nodet, M. (2016). Data assimilation . Philadel-
phia, PA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. Retrieved from
https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611974546 doi:
10.1137/1.9781611974546
Bao, T., Chen, S., Johnson, T. T., Givi, P., Sammak, S., & Jia, X. (2022). Physics
guided neural networks for spatio-temporal super-resolution of turbulent flows.
InThe 38th conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence. Retrieved from
https://openreview.net/forum?id=S98VJL8jcxq
Barth´ el´ emy, S., Brajard, J., Bertino, L., & Counillon, F. (2022, 8). Super-resolution
data assimilation. Ocean Dynamics ,72, 661-678. doi: 10.1007/s10236-022
-01523-x
Beauchamp, M., Febvre, Q., Georgenthum, H., & Fablet, R. (2022). 4dvarnet-
ssh: end-to-end learning of variational interpolation schemes for nadir and
wide-swath satellite altimetry. Geoscientific Model Development Discussions ,
2022 , 1–37. Retrieved from https://gmd.copernicus.org/preprints/
gmd-2022-241/ doi: 10.5194/gmd-2022-241
Bengio, Y. (2012). Practical recommendations for gradient-based training of deep
architectures. In G. Montavon, G. B. Orr, & K.-R. M¨ uller (Eds.), Neural net-
works: Tricks of the trade: Second edition (pp. 437–478). Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3
-642-35289-8 26doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8 26
Bengio, Y., Courville, A., & Vincent, P. (2013). Representation learning: A re-
view and new perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence ,35(8), 1798-1828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2013.50
Brunton, S. L., Noack, B. R., & Koumoutsakos, P. (2020). Machine learning for
fluid mechanics. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics ,52(1), 477-508. Re-
trieved from https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-fluid-010719-060214 doi:
10.1146/annurev-fluid-010719-060214
Burgers, G., van Leeuwen, P. J., & Evensen, G. (1998). Analysis scheme in
the ensemble kalman filter. Monthly Weather Review ,126(6), 1719 -
1724. Retrieved from https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/
mwre/126/6/1520-0493 1998 1261719 asitek 2.0.co 2.xml doi:
10.1175/1520-0493(1998)126 ⟨1719:ASITEK ⟩2.0.CO;2
Chattopadhyay, A., Mustafa, M., Hassanzadeh, P., Bach, E., & Kashinath, K.
(2022). Towards physics-inspired data-driven weather forecasting: integrat-
–29–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
ing data assimilation with a deep spatial-transformer-based u-net in a case
study with era5. Geoscientific Model Development ,15(5), 2221–2237. Re-
trieved from https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/15/2221/2022/ doi:
10.5194/gmd-15-2221-2022
Chen, R. T. Q., Rubanova, Y., Bettencourt, J., & Duvenaud, D. (2018). Neural or-
dinary differential equations. In Proceedings of the 32nd international confer-
ence on neural information processing systems (p. 6572–6583). Red Hook, NY,
USA: Curran Associates Inc.
Cheng, S., Quilodran-Casas, C., Ouala, S., Farchi, A., Liu, C., Tandeo, P., . . . Ar-
cucci, R. (2023). Machine learning with data assimilation and uncertainty
quantification for dynamical systems: a review.
Cohen, T. S., Geiger, M., & Weiler, M. (2019). A general theory of equivariant
cnns on homogeneous spaces. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelz-
imer, F. d 'Alch´ e-Buc, E. Fox, & R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems (Vol. 32). Curran Associates, Inc. Retrieved
from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2019/file/
b9cfe8b6042cf759dc4c0cccb27a6737-Paper.pdf
David, T. W., Marshall, D. P., & Zanna, L. (2017). The statistical nature
of turbulent barotropic ocean jets. Ocean Modelling ,113, 34-49. Re-
trieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1463500317300392 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocemod.2017.03.008
Dong, C., Loy, C. C., He, K., & Tang, X. (2014). Learning a deep convolutional
network for image super-resolution. In D. Fleet, T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, &
T. Tuytelaars (Eds.), Computer vision – eccv 2014 (pp. 184–199). Cham:
Springer International Publishing.
Ducournau, A., & Fablet, R. (2016). Deep learning for ocean remote sensing: an
application of convolutional neural networks for super-resolution on satellite-
derived sst data. In (p. 1-6). doi: 10.1109/PRRS.2016.7867019
Duraisamy, K. (2021, May). Perspectives on machine learning-augmented reynolds-
averaged and large eddy simulation models of turbulence. Phys. Rev. Flu-
ids,6, 050504. Retrieved from https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevFluids.6.050504 doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.6.050504
Evensen, G. (1994). Sequential data assimilation with a nonlinear quasi-geostrophic
model using monte carlo methods to forecast error statistics. Journal
of Geophysical Research: Oceans ,99(C5), 10143-10162. Retrieved from
https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/94JC00572
doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/94JC00572
Fablet, R., Chapron, B., Drumetz, L., M´ emin, E., Pannekoucke, O., & Rousseau, F.
(2021). Learning variational data assimilation models and solvers. Journal of
Advances in Modeling Earth Systems ,13(10), e2021MS002572. Retrieved
from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
2021MS002572 (e2021MS002572 2021MS002572) doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/
2021MS002572
Fraccaro, M., Kamronn, S., Paquet, U., & Winther, O. (2017). A disentan-
–30–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
gled recognition and nonlinear dynamics model for unsupervised learning.
InNips (p. 3604-3613). Retrieved from http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
6951-a-disentangled-recognition-and-nonlinear-dynamics-model-for
-unsupervised-learning
Fuchs, F., Worrall, D., Fischer, V., & Welling, M. (2020). Se(3)-transformers: 3d
roto-translation equivariant attention networks. In H. Larochelle, M. Ran-
zato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, & H. Lin (Eds.), Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems (Vol. 33, pp. 1970–1981). Curran Associates,
Inc. Retrieved from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
15231a7ce4ba789d13b722cc5c955834-Paper.pdf
Gaspari, G., & Cohn, S. E. (1999). Construction of correlation functions in two
and three dimensions. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society ,
125(554), 723-757. Retrieved from https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley
.com/doi/abs/10.1002/qj.49712555417 doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/
qj.49712555417
Grooms, I. (2021). Analog ensemble data assimilation and a method for con-
structing analogs with variational autoencoders. Quarterly Journal of
the Royal Meteorological Society ,147(734), 139-149. Retrieved from
https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/qj.3910
doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.3910
Ha, V. K., Ren, J.-C., Xu, X.-Y., Zhao, S., Xie, G., Masero, V., & Hussain,
A. (2019). Deep learning based single image super-resolution: A sur-
vey. International Journal of Automation and Computing . doi: 10.1007/
s11633-019-1183-x
Hammoud, M. A. E. R., Titi, E. S., Hoteit, I., & Knio, O. (2022). Cdanet: A
physics-informed deep neural network for downscaling fluid flows. Journal of
Advances in Modeling Earth Systems ,14(12), e2022MS003051. Retrieved
from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
2022MS003051 (e2022MS003051 2022MS003051) doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/
2022MS003051
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. (2015, December). Delving deep into rectifiers:
Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings
of the ieee international conference on computer vision (iccv).
Jiang, C., Esmaeilzadeh, S., Azizzadenesheli, K., Kashinath, K., Mustafa, M.,
Tchelepi, H. A., . . . Anandkumar, A. (2020, nov). Meshfreeflownet: A physics-
constrained deep continuous space-time super-resolution framework. In 2020
sc20: International conference for high performance computing, networking,
storage and analysis (sc) (p. 1-15). Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer
Society. Retrieved from https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/
SC41405.2020.00013 doi: 10.1109/SC41405.2020.00013
Kashinath, K., Mustafa, M., Albert, A., Wu, J.-L., Jiang, C., Esmaeilzadeh, S.,
. . . Prabhat, n. (2021). Physics-informed machine learning: case studies for
weather and climate modelling. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences ,379(2194), 20200093.
–31–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Retrieved from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/
rsta.2020.0093 doi: 10.1098/rsta.2020.0093
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In
Y. Bengio & Y. LeCun (Eds.), . Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1412
.6980
Krasnopolsky, V., & Belochitski, A. A. (2020). Using machine learning for model
physics: an overview. arXiv. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2002
.00416 doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2002.00416
Krishnan, R. G., Shalit, U., & Sontag, D. (2015). Deep kalman filters. arXiv.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05121 doi: 10.48550/ARXIV
.1511.05121
Li, B., Zhang, Y., Zhao, B., & Shao, H. (2020). 3d-reconstnet: A single-view 3d-
object point cloud reconstruction network. IEEE Access ,8, 83782-83790. doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2992554
Ling, J., Kurzawski, A., & Templeton, J. (2016). Reynolds averaged turbulence
modelling using deep neural networks with embedded invariance. Journal of
Fluid Mechanics ,807, 155–166. doi: 10.1017/jfm.2016.615
Liu, C., Fu, R., Xiao, D., Stefanescu, R., Sharma, P., Zhu, C., . . . Wang, C.
(2022). Enkf data-driven reduced order assimilation system. Engineering
Analysis with Boundary Elements ,139, 46-55. Retrieved from https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0955799722000510 doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enganabound.2022.02.016
Liu, G., Reda, F. A., Shih, K. J., Wang, T.-C., Tao, A., & Catanzaro, B. (2018,
September). Image inpainting for irregular holes using partial convolutions. In
Proceedings of the european conference on computer vision (eccv).
Maas, A. L., Hannun, A. Y., Ng, A. Y., et al. (2013). Rectifier nonlinearities im-
prove neural network acoustic models. In Proc. icml (Vol. 30, p. 3).
Mancini, M., Akata, Z., Ricci, E., & Caputo, B. (2020). Towards recognizing un-
seen categories in unseen domains. In A. Vedaldi, H. Bischof, T. Brox, & J.-
M. Frahm (Eds.), Computer vision – eccv 2020 (pp. 466–483). Cham: Springer
International Publishing.
Mandikal, P., Navaneet, K. L., Agarwal, M., & Babu, R. V. (2018). 3D-LMNet:
Latent embedding matching for accurate and diverse 3d point cloud recon-
struction from a single image. In Proceedings of the british machine vision
conference (BMVC).
Moreno-Torres, J. G., Raeder, T., Alaiz-Rodr´ ıguez, R., Chawla, N. V., & Herrera,
F. (2012). A unifying view on dataset shift in classification. Pattern Recog-
nition ,45(1), 521-530. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0031320311002901 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.patcog.2011.06.019
Niu, Z., Zhong, G., & Yu, H. (2021). A review on the attention mechanism of
deep learning. Neurocomputing ,452, 48-62. Retrieved from https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092523122100477X doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2021.03.091
–32–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Onishi, R., Sugiyama, D., & Matsuda, K. (2019). Super-resolution simulation for
real-time prediction of urban micrometeorology. SOLA ,15, 178-182. doi: 10
.2151/sola.2019-032
Ouala, S., Fablet, R., Herzet, C., Chapron, B., Pascual, A., Collard, F., & Gaultier,
L. (2018). Neural network based kalman filters for the spatio-temporal in-
terpolation of satellite-derived sea surface temperature. Remote Sensing ,
10(12). Retrieved from https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/10/12/1864 doi:
10.3390/rs10121864
Peyron, M., Fillion, A., G¨ urol, S., Marchais, V., Gratton, S., Boudier, P., & Goret,
G. (2021). Latent space data assimilation by using deep learning. Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society ,147(740), 3759-3777. Retrieved
from https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/qj.4153
doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.4153
Picard, D. (2021). Torch.manual seed(3407) is all you need: On the influence
of random seeds in deep learning architectures for computer vision. CoRR ,
abs/2109.08203 . Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.08203
Rasp, S. (2020). Coupled online learning as a way to tackle instabilities and bi-
ases in neural network parameterizations: general algorithms and lorenz 96
case study (v1.0). Geoscientific Model Development ,13(5), 2185–2196. Re-
trieved from https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/13/2185/2020/ doi:
10.5194/gmd-13-2185-2020
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., & Brox, T. (2015). U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation. In N. Navab, J. Hornegger, W. M. Wells, &
A. F. Frangi (Eds.), Medical image computing and computer-assisted interven-
tion – miccai 2015 (pp. 234–241). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Shi, W., Caballero, J., Huszar, F., Totz, J., Aitken, A. P., Bishop, R., . . . Wang,
Z. (2016, jun). Real-time single image and video super-resolution us-
ing an efficient sub-pixel convolutional neural network. In 2016 ieee
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (cvpr) (p. 1874-
1883). Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society. Retrieved from
https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.207 doi:
10.1109/CVPR.2016.207
Sosnovik, I., Moskalev, A., & Smeulders, A. W. (2021, January). Scale equivariance
improves siamese tracking. In Proceedings of the ieee/cvf winter conference on
applications of computer vision (wacv) (p. 2765-2774).
Stengel, K., Glaws, A., Hettinger, D., & King, R. N. (2020, 7). Adversarial super-
resolution of climatological wind and solar data. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences ,117, 16805-16815. Retrieved from https://
www.pnas.org/content/117/29/16805 doi: 10.1073/PNAS.1918964117
Vandal, T., Kodra, E., Ganguly, S., Michaelis, A., Nemani, R., & Ganguly, A. R.
(2017). Deepsd: Generating high resolution climate change projections through
single image super-resolution. In (p. 1663-1672). Association for Computing
Machinery. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1145/3097983.3098004
doi: 10.1145/3097983.3098004
–33–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., . . .
Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon et al. (Eds.), Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems (Vol. 30). Curran Associates,
Inc. Retrieved from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
Verma, V., Lamb, A., Beckham, C., Najafi, A., Mitliagkas, I., Lopez-Paz, D., &
Bengio, Y. (2019, 09–15 Jun). Manifold mixup: Better representations by
interpolating hidden states. In K. Chaudhuri & R. Salakhutdinov (Eds.), Pro-
ceedings of the 36th international conference on machine learning (Vol. 97, pp.
6438–6447). PMLR. Retrieved from https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
verma19a.html
Wang, C., Bentivegna, E., Zhou, W., Klein, L., & Elmegreen, B. (2020). Physics-
informed neural network super resolution for advection-diffusion models. In
Third workshop on machine learning and the physical sciences (neurips 2020).
Retrieved from https://ml4physicalsciences.github.io/2020/
Wang, J., Lan, C., Liu, C., Ouyang, Y., Qin, T., Lu, W., . . . Yu, P. (2022). Gen-
eralizing to unseen domains: A survey on domain generalization. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 1-1. doi: 10.1109/
TKDE.2022.3178128
Wang, J., Liu, Z., Foster, I., Chang, W., Kettimuthu, R., & Kotamarthi, V. R.
(2021). Fast and accurate learned multiresolution dynamical downscaling
for precipitation. Geoscientific Model Development ,14(10), 6355–6372. Re-
trieved from https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/14/6355/2021/ doi:
10.5194/gmd-14-6355-2021
Wang, L., Luo, Z., Xu, J., Luo, W., & Yuan, J. (2021). A novel framework for cost-
effectively reconstructing the global flow field by super-resolution. Physics of
Fluids ,33(9), 095105. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0062775
doi: 10.1063/5.0062775
Wang, R., Walters, R., & Yu, R. (2021). Incorporating symmetry into deep dynam-
ics models for improved generalization. In (Vol. abs/2002.03061). Retrieved
from https://iclr.cc/virtual/2021/poster/2785
Wang, Z., Bovik, A., Sheikh, H., & Simoncelli, E. (2004). Image quality assessment:
from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Pro-
cessing ,13(4), 600-612. doi: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861
Whitaker, J. S., Hamill, T. M., Wei, X., Song, Y., & Toth, Z. (2008). Ensemble data
assimilation with the ncep global forecast system. Monthly Weather Review ,
136(2), 463 - 482. Retrieved from https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/
journals/mwre/136/2/2007mwr2018.1.xml doi: https://doi.org/10.1175/
2007MWR2018.1
Wu, Y., Teufel, B., Sushama, L., Belair, S., & Sun, L. (2021). Deep learning-
based super-resolution climate simulator-emulator framework for urban heat
studies. Geophysical Research Letters ,48(19), e2021GL094737. Retrieved
from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
2021GL094737 (e2021GL094737 2021GL094737) doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/
–34–
manuscript submitted to Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems (JAMES)
2021GL094737
Yang, L. M., & Grooms, I. (2021). Machine learning techniques to construct
patched analog ensembles for data assimilation. Journal of Computational
Physics ,443, 110532. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0021999121004277 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcp.2021.110532
Yao, H., Wang, Y., Zhang, L., Zou, J. Y., & Finn, C. (2022). C-mixup: Improv-
ing generalization in regression. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal,
D. Belgrave, K. Cho, & A. Oh (Eds.), Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems (Vol. 35, pp. 3361–3376). Curran Associates, Inc. Retrieved
from https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2022/file/
1626be0ab7f3d7b3c639fbfd5951bc40-Paper-Conference.pdf
Yasuda, Y., & Onishi, R. (2023a, 04). Rotationally equivariant super-resolution of
velocity fields in two-dimensional flows using convolutional neural networks.
APL Machine Learning ,1(2). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1063/
5.0132326 (026107) doi: 10.1063/5.0132326
Yasuda, Y., & Onishi, R. (2023b, May). Yukiyasuda2718/4d-srda sr-mixup:
v0.2.0 [software]. Zenodo. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.7946486 doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7946486
Yasuda, Y., Onishi, R., & Matsuda, K. (2023). Super-resolution of three-dimensional
temperature and velocity for building-resolving urban micrometeorology using
physics-guided convolutional neural networks with image inpainting tech-
niques. Building and Environment ,243, 110613. Retrieved from https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132323006406 doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2023.110613
Yu, J., Lin, Z., Yang, J., Shen, X., Lu, X., & Huang, T. S. (2019, October). Free-
form image inpainting with gated convolution. In Proceedings of the ieee/cvf
international conference on computer vision (iccv).
Zeiler, M. D., & Fergus, R. (2014). Visualizing and understanding convolutional net-
works. In D. Fleet, T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, & T. Tuytelaars (Eds.), Computer vi-
sion – eccv 2014 (pp. 818–833). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Zhang, H., Cisse, M., Dauphin, Y. N., & Lopez-Paz, D. (2018). mixup: Beyond em-
pirical risk minimization. In International conference on learning representa-
tions. Retrieved from https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1Ddp1-Rb
Zhou, K., Liu, Z., Qiao, Y., Xiang, T., & Loy, C. C. (2022). Domain generalization:
A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 1-
20. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3195549
–35–
