Robust Ocean Subgrid-Scale Parameterizations
Using Fourier Neural Operators
Victor Mangeleer
University of Liège
vmangeleer@uliege.beGilles Louppe
University of Liège
g.louppe@uliege.be
Abstract
In climate simulations, small-scale processes shape ocean dynamics but remain
computationally expensive to resolve directly. For this reason, their contributions
are commonly approximated using empirical parameterizations, which lead to sig-
nificant errors in long-term projections. In this work, we develop parameterizations
based on Fourier Neural Operators, showcasing their accuracy and generalizability
in comparison to other approaches. Finally, we discuss the potential and limitations
of neural networks operating in the frequency domain, paving the way for future
investigation.
1 Introduction
Ocean simulations Conducting ocean simulations has become increasingly important, particularly
to understand and fight climate change. Despite growing computing power, a five-year Earth-scale
simulation of our oceans at a 1 km resolution still takes a month worth of computation [1]. One way to
address this issue is by reducing the simulation resolution to 15 km which makes it run 25 times faster.
However, this approach comes at the expense of neglecting a significant portion of subgrid-scale
processes contributions, i.e., the (sub)mesoscale (1-10 km) physical phenomena occurring at a scale
below the simulation resolution, which highly influence the ocean dynamics.
Parameterizations The challenge of achieving both speed and accuracy in ocean simulations
has been approached through the development of parameterizations. The idea is to conduct a low-
resolution simulation to take advantage of the fast computational time and correct it at each timestep
by adding the missing subgrid-scale contributions using approximate parameterizations. Their
development in simulation applications such as turbulent flows [2, 3] and, in our case, geophysical
flows [4–7] has been a major research effort. Nevertheless, these parameterizations all encounter
the same challenges: the closure problem with extra equations, the restricted working range and the
introduction of an artificial viscosity, which disturbs the turbulent nature of the flow. In response
to these challenges, the exploration of deep learning-based parameterizations started. For instance,
Fully-Convolutional Neural Networks [8] show spatially accurate dynamics correction but have
generalization and interpretability limitations. On the other hand, Fourier Neural Operators [9] (FNO)
have demonstrated notable improvements in terms of generalization and scale invariance [10–12].
To address the challenge of generalization, attention pivoted towards model discovery techniques
[13] to extract analytical parameterizations from raw data even if their results often lag behind neural
networks [14], indicating the need for improvements.
Contributions We show the effectiveness of Fourier Neural Operators-based (FNO) parameteri-
zations in addressing generalization issues and accurately correcting simulations. Furthermore, we
discuss extensively their advantages and limitations compared to well-established geophysical-flow
and deep learning-based parameterizations. All code, datasets, results, and analysis are publicly
available at https://github.com/VikVador/Ocean_FNO
Machine Learning and the Physical Sciences Workshop, NeurIPS 2023.arXiv:2310.02691v2  [cs.LG]  28 Nov 2023
2 Background
Ocean Flow Dynamics We focus on developing parameterizations for mid-latitude ocean flows
simulations. In this region, the ocean flow dynamics can be simulated using the quasi-geostrophic
equations of motion [15]. At each step of the simulation, all flow variables (e.g. velocity fields)
are retrieved by solving the prognostic equation for the potential vorticity field q. In a numerical
simulation, the actual equation solved is the averaged (denoted ¯·) prognostic equation given by
∂¯q
∂t+ (¯ u· ∇)¯q=¯F+¯D+¯S, (1)
where urepresents the velocity field vector, Fdenotes the forcing terms and Dstands for the dissipa-
tion terms. The neglected subgrid-scale processes contributions are taken into account by adding the
quantity ¯Sat each simulation timestep. Our objective is to develop an accurate parameterization that
quickly approximates ¯Sto eliminate energy deficiencies.
Fourier Neural Operators FNOs are neural network architectures that represent and process
data in the frequency domain through Fourier transforms. Depending on the problem physics, the
frequency domain representation is more suited to extract intricate input-output relationships, such as
demonstrated in the case of fluid mechanics where FNOs have shown strong performance [10, 12,
16]. An interesting property of this representation is that space-time convolution becomes a simple
multiplication in the frequency domain, which leads to faster convolution operations. The FNO
architecture faces limitations when scaled to deep architectures, leading to the development of the
Factorized Fourier Neural Operator (FFNO) [17]. By rethinking the architecture and enabling shared
use of convolution matrices at different computation points, the FFNO achieves higher computational
speed, reduces trainable parameters, and facilitates more extensive scaling.
3 Experimental Setup
Data In mid-latitude regions, ocean flows are categorized into two types: jet-driven flow , char-
acterized by predominant motion in a single direction, and eddy-driven flow , marked by chaotic
swirling motion. To simulate these ocean dynamics, we use the two-layer quasigeostrophic model
from PyQG [18]. This model offers the necessary complexity to faithfully represent both types of
flow. Specifically, the upper layer simulates interactions with the atmosphere, while the lower layer
represents interactions with the ocean bottom. It is important to note that these layers also interact
with each other. For training, the parameterization takes as inputs ( u,v,q)∈RH×Hwhere uand
vare the ocean flow longitudinal and latitudinal velocity fields, and Hthe grid resolution. The
parameterization output is the missing subgrid-scale contributions denoted as ¯S. The loss function is
the mean squared error between the ground truth and the value predicted by the parameterization.
Protocol We assess the quality of our parameterizations through a standardized benchmarking
framework [14] and compare against several baselines. These baselines include a Fully-Convolutional
Neural Networks (FCNN) [8], U-NET [19], and common empirical geophysical parameterizations
such as Smagorinsky [5], Backscattering and Biharmonic [6], and one derived through symbolic
regression on raw data [13, 14]. For the neural networks, they use the same inputs, predict identical
quantities, and each consists of approximately 300,000 trainable parameters. Furthermore, the FCNN
is used in its optimal configuration presented in [14], and the hyperparameters of the U-NET have
been adjusted to make its capacity match the one of the others. These two models will not undergo
any further fine-tuning. The primary objective is to assess, at a fixed capacity, whether a model
exhibits superior performance compared to others. Afterwards, the model demonstrating the most
promising capabilities, in this case FFNO, will undergo further tuning for optimization. We conducted
two tests: offline and online. Offline testing means evaluating how effectively the parameterization
predicts ¯Son a dataset composed of 5000 samples drawn from ten distinct, previously unobserved
jet-driven simulations. For each fluid layer, we compute the coefficient of determination R2, yielding
a value of 1 for perfect predictions, 0 when predictions are no better than guessing the mean, and
negative values when predictions are worse than guessing the mean. Online testing means evaluating
the parameterization performance at making long-term projections. This involves analyzing whether
the parameterized low-resolution simulation dynamics align better with those in the corresponding
high-resolution simulation, in contrast to the low-resolution simulation.
2
To do so, we examine the power spectrum of energy-related flow properties. If the observed
spectrum closely matches the one from the high-resolution simulation, it confirms the parameterization
effectiveness in redistributing and addressing energy deficiencies across various scales during the
simulation.
4 Results
Offline The results are summarized in Tab.1. In the first row, we establish a baseline using the
training conditions outlined in [14], which used a dataset of 5000 samples from a single 10-year-long
eddy-driven simulation. This allowed us to evaluate both accuracy and generalization across different
flow types. Several key observations emerge: both FCNN and U-NET yield negative R2results
in both layers. FNOs exhibit a positive score in the upper layer. Only FFNO achieves a positive
score in both layers. In summary, the FNOs demonstrate superior generalization abilities. In the
second row, we investigate the impact of mixing different eddy-driven simulations while maintaining
a constant total number of samples. This led to improvements in all R2values. In the third row, we
increased the number of samples. Surprisingly, we observe a decrease in overall R2values, with one
exception: FFNO. This suggests that all models may have overfit the eddy dynamics during training.
However, we speculate that the FNOs ability to work with spectral data representations allows
it to extract more complex interactions relationships between large-scale and subgrid-scale
processes thus leading to better generalization performance . In the fourth row of results, we
explore the impact of training on both ocean flow dynamics. FCNN and U-NET models achieve
positive R2values in the upper layer but struggle with negative values in the lower layer. In contrast,
both FNOs consistently achieve positive R2values, highlighting once again the effectiveness of
spectral representation computations. As our last experiment, we recognized FFNO as a promising
parameterization and we proceeded to fine-tune it across various configurations, with detailed results
summarized in the appendix. This led to the development of FFNO*, the best configuration obtained
with a substantially larger capacity, i.e. nearly 20 times larger than the one of FFNO. For this last
experiment, we observe that FFNO* achieves unparalleled accuracy, sparking the possibility of
extracting a more complex and refined analytical expression for the parameterization through
symbolic regression .
Online As shown in Fig.2, while the FFNO (green) demonstrated good generalization abilities
(see Tab.1, third row), it failed to reproduce the high-resolution (blue) simulation spectral profiles.
This discrepancy arises from its limitations in accurately predicting the lower layer dynamics, which
significantly impacts the long-term simulation and once again highlight the importance of finding good
parameterizations. In contrast, FFNO* (red) displayed superior and consistent results across all flow
variables (except APEflux) compared to the baselines (grey). Indeed, the baseline models exhibited
inconsistencies, either causing spectral explosion or flattening. Despite the fact that FFNO* achieves
superior results with comparable capacity to other models, it faces the drawback of using twenty-four
Fourier layers, as opposed to the original FNO. Consequently, the speed-up due to utilizing a
deep-learning-based parameterization for low-resolution simulations is compromised . This is
shown in Tab.2, where the increased computational time, attributed to the frequent computation of
Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform, surpasses the one of the high-resolution simulation.
In conclusion, leveraging the frequency representation of data allows Fourier Neural Operators
to exhibit superior generalization by capturing multiscale interactions. Nevertheless, there is
still a need to enhance the FFNO architecture. This improvement is crucial not only for refining
parameterization generalization capabilities but also for reducing simulation computational
time, ultimately making the development of Fourier Neural Operator-based parameterizations
worthwhile .
3
5 Conclusion
Our exploration of Fourier Neural Operators (FNOs) as subgrid-scale parameterizations demonstrates
their superior ability to generalize when predicting missing subgrid-scale contributions in new
ocean dynamics. However, further refinement is needed for the learned parameterization since its
predictions lack the necessary accuracy for long-term projections. When learning a parameterization
across all possible ocean dynamics, FNOs again outperform the baselines in terms of generalization.
This reinforces the notion that FNOs are better suited for this task. Moreover, after optimization,
FNOs achieved remarkable accuracy levels. Yet, we must acknowledge that the computational time
for the parameterized low-resolution model is three times longer than that of the high-resolution
counterpart thus making it unusable. Furthermore, while the parameterization effectively corrected
energy deficiencies, spatial accuracy remained a concern. Even if the predictions were accurate, their
incorrect placement had a noticeable impact on flow dynamics.
Table 1: Analysis of our parameterizations accuracy by calculating the coefficient of determination
(R2) for both ocean model fluid layers. A R2value close to 1 indicates better results. The Training
Datasets column provides information on training sample sizes and the number of simulations used.
Testing is performed using a dataset of jets-driven flow simulations. The key observations are: FFNO
generalizes better in every situations (row 1 to 3). When trained on both ocean dynamics, FCNN
and U-NET perform poorly on the lower layer whereas the FNOs obtained positive score suggesting
again better generalization capabilities. When the training and architecture are optimized, FFNO*
reaches new levels of accuracy suggesting that extracting the analytical expression of the learned
parameterization is a path worth to explore.
Training Datasets Upper layer R2/ Lower layer R2
Samples [ 103] Eddies Jets FCNN U-NET FNO FFNO FFNO*
5 1 0 -0.21 / -10.60 -0.69 / -16.30 0.18 / -0.92 0.76 / 0.12 -
5 10 0 -0.23 / -11.80 -0.40 / -12.34 0.42 / -0.23 0.78 / 0.24 -
20 40 0 -0.34 / -15.20 -0.43 / -14.40 0.41 / -0.34 0.86 /0.37 -
5 5 5 0.40 / -5.75 0.32 / -4.91 0.49 / 0.13 0.83 / 0.49 0.99 /0.93
Table 2: Analysis of the computational time for a 10-year jet-driven flow scenario simulation
reveals the following: The first two columns display the baseline times for high and low-resolution
simulations, while the next four columns show the total time needed for a parameterized low-
resolution simulation. The speed-up metric quantifies the improvement in computational time
compared to a high-resolution simulation. A speed-up above 1 indicates a positive gain—meaning the
simulation is faster, with higher values being better—while a speed-up below 1 signifies a negative
gain, indicating slower performance than the high-resolution simulation. Key findings indicate
that only the FCNN, U-NET, and FNO parameterizations yield positive speed-ups, despite their
worst predictive accuracy. On the other hand, while FFNO and FFNO* exhibit superior correction
capabilities, their simulation times surpass that of a high-resolution simulation, negating the advantage
of using parameterizations. This discrepancy is attributed to the FFNO’s twenty-four Fourier layers
compared to the FNO, resulting in significant computational overhead due to the numerous Fourier
transformations and inverse Fourier transforms required between layers.
Baselines [min] Parameterized low-resolution (LR) [min]
High-resolution Low-resolution FCNN U-NET FNO FFNO FFNO*
22.25 2.10 11.09 13.05 11.397 46.89 61.68
Speed-up [-] 1.00 10.58 2.00 1.70 1.95 0.47 0.36
4
Baseline (Neural Network) Baselines (Analytical) Baseline (Simulations) Tested Parameterizations
*
Figure 1: Analysis of energy transfer contributions (y-axis) across various length scales (x-axis) for
different flow quantities. The objective is to align the power spectrum with that of the high-resolution
(blue). The observed flow quantities are: KEflux is the kinetic energy transfer, while KEfrictionspec
assesses energy dissipation due to friction with the bottom of the ocean. APEflux measures available
potential energy for transfer, and APEgenspec tracks newly generated potential energy at each scale.
Observations reveal that while FFNO (green) exhibits good offline generalization (see Tab.1, third
row), its predictions lack the accuracy necessary for a stable long-term simulation, resulting in
spectra divergence from the high-resolution. Conversely, the optimized FFNO* (red), trained on both
flow dynamics types, demonstrates improved matching with the high-resolution spectra (except for
APEflux). Baselines (grey) do not achieve the same consistency as FFNO*, they either excessively
amplify the spectra, worsening them compared to the low-resolution (orange), or significantly dampen
them (indicated by the flat lines for KEfrictionspec).
6 Future work
For future work, we propose investigating novel architectures based on Fourier Neural Operators.
To address spatial challenges, we suggest exploring a hybrid approach by combining space-time
convolution with spectral convolution. In terms of computational efficiency, there is potential for
improvement in the design of Fourier layers to reduce their number. Finally, we find it intriguing to
explore the application of symbolic regression to extract learned parameterizations.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was supported by Service Public de Wallonie Recherche under Grant No. 2010235 -
ARIAC by DIGITALWALLONIA4.AI. In addition to that, the authors would like to thank François
Rozet, Gerome Andry, Omer Rochman and Sacha Lewin for their support and insightful feedback.
5
References
[1] Oliver Fuhrer et al. “Near-global climate simulation at 1 km resolution: establishing a perfor-
mance baseline on 4888 GPUs with COSMO 5.0”. In Geoscientific Model Development 11.4
(2018), pp. 1665–1681.
[2] AK Singhal and DB Spalding. “Predictions of two-dimensional boundary layers with the
aid of the k-epsilon model of turbulence”. In Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering 25.3 (1981), pp. 365–383.
[3] Florian R Menter. Improved two-equation k-omega turbulence models for aerodynamic flows .
Tech. rep. 1992.
[4] Ludwig Prandtl. “7. Bericht über Untersuchungen zur ausgebildeten Turbulenz”. In ZAMM-
Journal of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics/Zeitschrift für Angewandte Mathematik und
Mechanik 5.2 (1925), pp. 136–139.
[5] Joseph Smagorinsky. “General circulation experiments with the primitive equations: I. The
basic experiment”. In Monthly weather review 91.3 (1963), pp. 99–164.
[6] Malte F Jansen and Isaac M Held. “Parameterizing subgrid-scale eddy effects using energeti-
cally consistent backscatter”. In Ocean Modelling 80 (2014), pp. 36–48.
[7] Malte F Jansen et al. “Energy budget-based backscatter in an eddy permitting primitive
equation model”. In Ocean Modelling 94 (2015), pp. 15–26.
[8] Thomas Bolton and Laure Zanna. “Applications of deep learning to ocean data inference and
subgrid parameterization”. In Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 11.1 (2019),
pp. 376–399.
[9] Zongyi Li et al. “Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial Differential Equations”. In
International Conference on Learning Representations . 2021.
[10] Jaideep Pathak et al. “Fourcastnet: A global data-driven high-resolution weather model using
adaptive fourier neural operators”. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11214 (2022).
[11] Boris Bonev et al. “Spherical Fourier Neural Operators: Learning Stable Dynamics on the
Sphere”. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03838 (2023).
[12] Gege Wen et al. “U-FNO—An enhanced Fourier neural operator-based deep-learning model
for multiphase flow”. In Advances in Water Resources 163 (2022), p. 104180.
[13] Laure Zanna and Thomas Bolton. “Data-driven equation discovery of ocean mesoscale clo-
sures”. In Geophysical Research Letters 47.17 (2020), e2020GL088376.
[14] Andrew Ross et al. “Benchmarking of machine learning ocean subgrid parameterizations
in an idealized model”. In Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 15.1 (2023),
e2022MS003258.
[15] Stephen Griffies. Fundamentals of ocean climate models . Princeton university press, 2018.
[16] Thorsten Kurth et al. “Fourcastnet: Accelerating global high-resolution weather forecasting
using adaptive fourier neural operators”. In Proceedings of the Platform for Advanced Scientific
Computing Conference . 2023, pp. 1–11.
[17] Alasdair Tran et al. “Factorized Fourier Neural Operators”. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations . 2023.
[18] Nora Loose et al. “GCM-filters: A Python package for diffusion-based spatial filtering of
gridded data”. In Journal of Open Source Software 7.70 (2022).
[19] Olaf Ronneberger et al. “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation”.
InMedical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th Inter-
national Conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18 . Springer.
2015, pp. 234–241.
6
7 Appendix
Figure 2: Sensitivity analysis of FFNO hyperparameters on jet-driven flow. Models trained on a
dataset with eddies and jet-driven flows are evaluated offline. The first two columns depict correlations
in the upper and lower layers, while the next two show R2coefficients. Hyperparameters include
width (latent space size), the number of Fourier layers N, and the range of Fourier modes. Notably,
the number of retained modes appears to have the most impact, with broader ranges yielding better
results. Increased Fourier layers generally show a minor impact but significantly prolong the forward
pass time due to additional Fourier transform computations. Enhanced width improves model capacity
and results, with a lesser impact on computational time compared to an increase in depth. As a result,
FFNO uses a width of 128, the first 32 modes, and 24 Fourier layers.
7
