JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 1
GNN-Surrogate: A Hierarchical and Adaptive
Graph Neural Network for Parameter Space
Exploration of Unstructured-Mesh Ocean
Simulations
Neng Shi, Jiayi Xu, Skylar W. Wurster, Hanqi Guo, Member, IEEE, Jonathan Woodring,
Luke P . Van Roekel, and Han-Wei Shen, Member, IEEE
Abstract —We propose GNN-Surrogate, a graph neural network-based surrogate model to explore the parameter space of ocean climate
simulations. Parameter space exploration is important for domain scientists to understand the inﬂuence of input parameters (e.g., wind
stress) on the simulation output (e.g., temperature). The exploration requires scientists to exhaust the complicated parameter space by
running a batch of computationally expensive simulations. Our approach improves the efﬁciency of parameter space exploration with a
surrogate model that predicts the simulation outputs accurately and efﬁciently. Speciﬁcally, GNN-Surrogate predicts the output ﬁeld with
given simulation parameters so scientists can explore the simulation parameter space with visualizations from user-speciﬁed visual
mappings. Moreover, our graph-based techniques are designed for unstructured meshes, making the exploration of simulation outputs on
irregular grids efﬁcient. For efﬁcient training, we generate hierarchical graphs and use adaptive resolutions. We give quantitative and
qualitative evaluations on the MPAS-Ocean simulation to demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of GNN-Surrogate. Source code is
publicly available at https://github.com/trainsn/GNN-Surrogate.
Index Terms —Parameter Space Exploration, Ensemble Visualization, Unstructured Mesh, Surrogate Modeling, Graph Neural Network,
Adaptive Resolution.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
INoceanography, environment, and climate sciences, scientists
usually run ensemble simulations [1] given different input
parameters to perform parameter space analysis and exploration.
One of the analyses and exploration is to ﬁnd out the potential
relationship between the simulation parameters and outputs [2].
For example, Model for Prediction Across Scales-Ocean (MPAS-
Ocean) is an ocean model on unstructured grids, and oceanog-
raphers control input parameters of interest (e.g., bulk wind
stress ampliﬁcation) to analyze output ﬁelds (e.g., temperature)
change among different simulation results. Scientiﬁc visualizations
help scientists explore, verify, and summarize differences and
similarities between ensemble simulations efﬁciently and intuitively.
However, the simulation space exploration requires exhausting the
complicated parameter space by running a batch of computationally
expensive simulations.
To make the parameter space exploration efﬁcient, scientists
utilize and train a surrogate model by sampling parameter set-
Neng Shi, Jiayi Xu, Skylar W. Wurster and Han-Wei Shen are with
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
E-mail: fshi.1337, xu.2205, wurster.18, shen.94 g@osu.edu
Hanqi Guo is with the Mathematics and Computer Science Division,
Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA.
E-mail: hguo@anl.gov
Jonathan Woodring is with the Applied Computer Science Group (CCS-7),
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87544.
Email: woodring@lanl.gov
Luke P . Van Roekel is with the Fluid Dynamics and Solid Mechanics Group
(T-3), Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87544.
Email: lvanroekel@lanl.govtings from the parameter space. Existing surrogate model-based
parameter space analyses usually are either image-based (e.g.,
InSituNet [3]) or focus on regular grids [4], [5], which leads to
two limitations. First, image-based surrogate models visualize the
generated simulation data with several predeﬁned visual mappings
so that scientists are not able to adjust the setting of visual mappings
to ﬁnd features of interest after the models have been trained.
Second, existing regular grid-based methods do not directly work
for unstructured data since they learn the mapping between the
simulation parameters and the raw simulation data on regular grids.
In this work, to solve the two limitations mentioned above,
we present a Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based method to
predict raw data on unstructured grids with given simulation
parameters. We model MPAS-Ocean unstructured meshes as a
graph and propose GNN-Surrogate that supports graph operations
to learn from MPAS-Ocean simulation output. A graph can
capture the vertex connectivity and distance information, and
thus is one of the common choices to represent unstructured
meshes [6]–[8]. For efﬁcient training, we generate hierarchical
graphs, where coarse graphs help GNN-Surrogate capture the
global phenomena quickly. To generate hierarchical graphs, we
perform a graph coarsening algorithm. Furthermore, we cut the
graph hierarchy to reduce the I/O and training computation cost.
Speciﬁcally, with the graph hierarchy cutting, GNN-Surrogate
adaptively decides which resolutions to use at different locations,
depending on how complicated phenomena happen at locations.
Also, the simulation outputs in the training dataset are represented
by adaptive resolutions, which supervise the GNN-Surrogate
training. Given the hierarchical graphs, GNN-Surrogate is anarXiv:2202.08956v2  [physics.ao-ph]  21 Feb 2022
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 2
upsampling-convolution generator. The graph convolution can
reﬁne the feature map represented on graphs. Moreover, its local
connectivity and weight sharing scheme allow GNN-Surrogate to
avoid over-ﬁtting. Domain scientists evaluate our proposed method
on MPAS-Ocean [9].
Overall, our workﬂow is composed of four parts. The ﬁrst part
isgraph hierarchy generation . Given MPAS-Ocean unstructured
meshes, we perform a graph coarsening algorithm to build a
graph hierarchy consisting of graphs at different resolution levels.
Then, we cut the graph hierarchy and transform the graphs.
The second part is training data generation . Note that all the
simulation outputs in the training dataset are represented by
adaptive resolutions, depending on where complex phenomena
appear, which can reduce the I/O and training computation cost.
The third part is ofﬂine training . We train GNN-Surrogate based
on simulation parameters as the input of our model and adaptive
resolution output data as the output. The fourth part is post-
hoc exploration and analysis . With a trained GNN-Surrogate,
simulation outputs can be predicted with given input parameters
and then visualized with existing algorithms.
GNN-Surrogate can be used for visual analysis on unstructured
data, allowing scientists to have a quick preview of simulation
outputs given a set of input simulation parameters. From the
prediction of raw data, various visualization technologies can be
applied to let scientists analyze features of interest from different
aspects. The quick preview makes the visual exploration of the
input parameter space more convenient. Therefore, scientists can
efﬁciently run simulations to analyze the features of interest
without going through the entire parameter space. Moreover, GNN-
Surrogate allows parameter sensitivity analysis for scientists to
understand parameter selections better.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are twofold:
We propose GNN-Surrogate to predict simulation outputs
given input parameters so that scientists can explore the
simulation parameter space with visualizations using user-
speciﬁed visual mappings.
Our graph-based techniques are designed speciﬁcally for
unstructured meshes, facilitating the efﬁcient exploration of
simulation outputs on irregular grids.
2 R ELATED WORK
In this section, we review related work in parameter space
exploration and graph neural networks on unstructured data.
GNN-Surrogate is also categorized as deep learning for scientiﬁc
visualization work. Readers can check the supplementary material
or one survey paper [10] for more details.
2.1 Parameter Space Exploration
We divide existing parameter space exploration work into two
categories: (1) traditional methods without surrogate models and
(2) surrogate-model based methods.
Traditional parameter space exploration methods ﬁrst collect
the simulation input and output pairs from ensemble runs, and
perform parameter space exploration on the collected pairs. In
the visualization ﬁeld, to explore the parameter space of high-
dimensional ensemble data, researchers rely on visualization
methods such as glyphs [11], matrices [12], line charts [13], parallel
plots [2], [14], scatter plots [15]–[17], and radial plots [18]–[20].
The major limitation of these methods is the inability to analyze
input parameters that have not been simulated.Surrogate models, including our GNN-Surrogate, can predict
simulation outputs of unseen input parameters for parameter space
exploration. The surrogate model can be at (1) the image level or
(2) the data level. First, an image-based surrogate model called
InSituNet [3] supports parameter space exploration for ensemble
simulations that are visualized in situ. Its major limitation is that
the simulation output is only visualized with several predeﬁned
visual mappings, meaning scientists cannot adjust visual mappings
to ﬁnd features of interest after models have been trained. Second,
researchers have also used different techniques such as machine
learning [4], [5] and Gaussian process [21], [22] to predict raw
data using surrogate models. Hazarika et al. [4] trained a surrogate
model to approximate the yeast cell polarization simulation model
in the NNV A system. Alden et al. [5] used a machine learning-
based surrogate model to increase users’ biological understanding
of a simulator of lymphoid tissue organogenesis. Urban et al. [21]
proposed a Latin hypercube to improve the quality of a Gaussian
process emulator on a simple Earth system model. For ensemble-
based sensitivity analysis, Erdal et al. [22] used a Gaussian
process emulator and active subspaces to sample behavioral model
parameters. However, these data-level methods do not directly work
for our unstructured-mesh simulations since they learn the mapping
between the simulation parameters and the raw simulation data on
regular grids. Our work is a Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based
method speciﬁcally designed for unstructured meshes, which makes
the exploration of simulation outputs on irregular grids efﬁcient.
2.2 Graph Neural Networks on Unstructured Data
Graph neural networks have been used to learn representations
from unstructured data. These methods can be divided into (1)
spectral methods and (2) spatial methods.
Spectral methods ﬁrst calculate the eigendecomposition of a
graph Laplacian to transform graph signals from the spatial domain
to the spectral domain. Then the graph convolution is applied to
the graph’s spectral representation. Researchers have applied these
methods to spherical data. DeepSphere [6], [7] is a spherical CNN
constructed by representing the sphere as a graph, and spectral
CNN operations such as convolution and pooling are deﬁned on it.
Nevertheless, it is hard for us to exploit edge attribute information
of the graph by spectral methods since ﬁlters are learned from the
spectral domain. Thus, we solve our problem by spatial methods.
Spatial methods, on the other hand, deﬁne convolutions directly
on the graph by grouping neighbors. To make use of the edge
attributes, researchers designed dynamic edge-conditioned ﬁlters.
Simonovsky and Komodakis [23] used a multi-layer perceptron
to compute the convolution kernels given edge labels. Valsesia et
al. [24] represented the edge information by the difference between
features on two neighboring nodes. Lan et al. [25] proposed Geo-
Conv by exploiting the edges’ Euclidean geometric information.
Our kernel is similar to Geo-Conv, while the difference is that we
model edges in the spherical polar coordinate rather than Cartesian
coordinate since it is more suitable for the MPAS-Ocean datasets.
3 MPAS-O CEAN MODEL BACKGROUND
MPAS-Ocean [9] is a model for describing and evaluating the ocean.
By exploiting unstructured meshes, MPAS-Ocean is particularly
suitable for regionally enhancing the resolution without inﬂuencing
the global simulation quality.
MPAS-Ocean’s mesh structure is shown in Figure 1. In earth
science, the directions consistent with and perpendicular to the
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 3
(c) (a) (b)
Fig. 1. (a) MPAS-Ocean’s structure. (b) Horizontal Voronoi polygons.
Dashed lines form Voronoi polygons. v0;i,v$
0;0,v$
0;1,v$
0;2,v$
0;3,v$
0;4,v$
0;5are
Voronoi polygon cell centers. Solid lines link cell centers. (c) Cross section.
vl
0;0,vl
0;1arev0;i’s vertical neighbors. Blue lines link vertical neighbors.
gravity are deﬁned as vertical andhorizontal , respectively. The
oceans are divided both horizontally and vertically by oceanog-
raphers. Scientists try to solve issues related to horizontal and
vertical discretization by MPAS Ocean. The horizontal grids
depend on Spherical Centroidal V oronoi Tessellations (SCVTs),
i.e., a spherical surface is composed of V oronoi regions. Some
variables of interest (e.g., temperature) are stored at the V oronoi
polygon cell centers. Note that in one horizontal spherical layer,
the V oronoi region distributions on the sphere are based on a
user-deﬁned mesh-density function, as shown in Figure 3(a). For
example, for the EC60to30 [26] mesh, the grids’ cell sizes vary
from 30km to 60km. As shown in Figure 3(b), scientists want
to use high resolution in equatorial and polar regions because
some interesting natural phenomenon happens there such as eastern
equatorial Paciﬁc cold tongue, which can be reﬂected from the
temperature ﬁeld in Figure 3(c).
Vertically, to model the 3D ocean, scientists scale and copy the
V oronoi polygons to different depth levels and build spherical layers
perpendicular to the Earth’s surface. Scientists sample densely near
the ocean surface to model complex phenomenons.
4 GNN-S URROGATE OVERVIEW
Our goal is to develop a model to support parameter exploration
and visualization of ocean ensemble simulations with some input
simulation parameters. We achieve this by creating a surrogate
model predicting simulation outputs given simulation parameters.
As mentioned in Section 3, MPAS is successful because it exploits
unstructured meshes. To support machine learning on unstructured
meshes, we design a graph neural network (GNN)-based model,
GNN-Surrogate, to directly predict the ocean data presented by
unstructured grids.
Figure 2 provides the workﬂow of our approach. GNN-
Surrogate is an upsampling-convolution generator, which requires
graphs at different resolution levels. We construct a level-zero
graph ( G0) given the full resolution of MPAS-Ocean’s unstructured
meshes (Section 5.1) and perform a graph coarsening algorithm to
build a graph hierarchy consisting of graphs at different resolution
levels ( G1;G2; ::: ) (Section 5.2). Due to the GPU memory
size constraint, GPU memory may not be sufﬁcient to hold the
intermediate feature maps of full-resolution data.
Our solution to the GPU memory size constraint problem is
to use adaptive data resolutions. We ﬁrst run a few simulations
with random input simulation parameters to gather the graph
hierarchy cutting policy. The cutting policy is made by ﬁnding
where complex phenomena appear in the simulation outputs. We
discuss the number of simulation runs required for the cuttingpolicy in the supplementary material. Following the cutting policy,
we cut the graph hierarchy and transform the hierarchical graphs,
which can reduce the I/O and training computation cost. (Sec-
tion 5.3). The transformed graphs are used as templates to generate
adaptive resolution outputs for future simulation runs. (Section 5.4).
Then, GNN-Surrogate that consists of speciﬁcally designed graph
convolution (Section 6.2) and upsampling (Section 6.3) operators,
is trained to learn the mapping from simulation parameters to
simulation outputs with adaptive resolutions (Section 6.4). GNN-
Surrogate can ﬁrst create low-resolution feature maps containing the
global data information and represent them in coarser graphs with
the transformed graph hierarchy. Then GNN-Surrogate can reﬁne
the feature maps until the feature maps become a full resolution.
Finally, during post-hoc exploration and analysis, with a trained
GNN-Surrogate, scientists can predict a simulation output given
a new input parameter setting and then use existing visualization
algorithms to generate visualization images and perform further
analysis and evaluation.
5 D ATA STRUCTURE : H IERARCHICAL GRAPHS
FOR DATA WITH ADAPTIVE RESOLUTIONS
Our goal is to learn a function Fthat maps a set of input simulation
parameters Psimto the corresponding simulation output Sused
for visualization. The function can be deﬁned as: F(Psim)!S.
Training a deep model for high-resolution MPAS-Ocean data can
be prohibitively expensive. To reduce the computation and memory
cost, we decompose the function as F(Psim) =Far!s(Fp!ar(Psim)),
where Fp!aris the function maps the input simulation parameter to
the output represented with adaptive resolutions, and Far!sconverts
the adaptive resolution result to the predicted simulation output
with full resolution.
In this section, we build hierarchical graphs ( G0;G1;G2; :::)
to represent outputs with adaptive resolutions. The graph G0is
built on the meshes with full resolution, which is presented next.
5.1 Edge-weighted Graph Construction
We build a directed graph G0= (V0;E0)of level zero from MPAS-
Ocean unstructured geodesic grids, where V0is the node set, E0
is the edge set. A variable of interest (cell-centered) such as
temperature is deﬁned on a node v0;i. Every node v0;iis attached
with its Cartesian coordinate (x0;i;y0;i;z0;i)and spherical coordinate
(r0;i;q0;i;f0;i).
E0can be decomposed into two groups, horizontal edges
E$
0and vertical edges El
0, based on geographic information of
edges, where E0=E$
0[El
0. Note that horizontal andvertical are
the directions perpendicular to and consistent with the gravity,
respectively, as illustrated in Figure 1. We deﬁne horizontal
and vertical edges separately because the horizontal and vertical
resolutions are not on the same scale. A node v0;iis connected with
its horizontal neighbors across the cell walls, which are denoted
as graph nodes v$
0;j, and (v0;i;v$
0;j)2E$
0is formed as horizontal
edges, as shown in Figure 1(b). Most nodes are connected with
six horizontal neighbors, but many nodes near the continents have
15horizontal neighbors. Also, v0;iis connected to no more
than two vertical neighbors vl
0;j, and (v0;i;vl
0;j)2El
0is formed as
vertical edges, as shown in Figure 1(c).
To describe the geographical relationships, we ﬁrst compute
the distance between two edge-connected nodes, where a shorter
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 4
parameter 
1
parameter 
N1-1 output 1
output 
N1-1graph  
constructiongraph 
coarsening
run  
simulations
parameter 
0 output 0
(reference )
residual 1subtract 
reference
residual 0
residual 
N1-1graph 
transformation(a)
(b)
 output 
N1+N2-1run  
simulations
 output N 1subtract 
reference
residual 
N1
residual 
N1+N2-1adaptive 
resolution
residual N 1
adaptive 
resolution
residual N 1+N2-1adaptive 
resolutionadaptive 
resolution
residual 0...N1-1(c)
parameters
GeneratorTraining
predicted adaptive 
resolution   residualground truth 
adaptive resolution  
residual
new 
parameter
Trained 
generatorInference
predicted residualpredicted adaptive 
resolution residual(d)
predicted 
simulation outputadd 
reference (e)
………………parameter 
0...N1-1
parameter 
N1+N2-1parameter 
N1…
predicted 
visualization visualizeTraining  Data GenerationCutting Policy 
Generation
adaptive 
resolution
residual 0...N1-1Graph Hierarchy 
Generation
upsample01 23 4
5 601 23 4
5 6
1112
13789
10
1112
13789
10789
5 6
=
Fig. 2. Workﬂow of our approach. (a) Given the MPAS-Ocean mesh structure, a corresponding graph hierarchy is generated. (b) A few simulations are
run for generating the graph hierarchy cutting policy. The cutting policy is used to guide representing the simulation output with adaptive resolutions.
(c) Another batch of ensemble simulations is run for collecting the training data. (d) A deep surrogate model (i.e., GNN-Surrogate) is trained based on
the generated training dataset. (e) In the inference stage, GNN-Surrogate is used to predict the simulation output. The predicted simulation output
can be visualized later for parameter space exploration.
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 3. Scalar ﬁelds. (a)Mesh Density. (b)Cell Size. (c)Temperature.
distance means the two nodes strongly inﬂuence each other. The
distance is measured as follows,
d(v0;i;v0;j) =8
<
:d$(v0;i;v0;j)if(v0;i;v0;j)2E$
0;
dl(v0;i;v0;j) if(v0;i;v0;j)2El
0;
+¥ otherwise ;
where d$(v0;i;v0;j)is the great-circle distance [27] and
dl(v0;i;v0;j)is the Euclidean distance.
Inspired by DeepSphere [6], we formulate the geographical
relationships between two edge-connected nodes by weight of the
edge, which is deﬁned as
w0(v0;i;v0;j) =8
>>>>><
>>>>>:exp
 (d$(v0;i;v0;j))2
4r$
0
if(v0;i;v0;j)2E$
0;
exp 
 (dl(v0;i;v0;j))2
4rl
0!
if(v0;i;v0;j)2El
0;
0 otherwise ;
(1)
A higher weight comes from a shorter distance, indicating that two
nodes have a stronger relationship, and
r$
0=1E$
0å
(v0;i;v0;j)2E$
0(d$(v0;i;v0;j))2;
rl
0=1El
0å
(v0;i;v0;j)2El
0(dl(v0;i;v0;j))2are the average distance square of all the horizontal and vertical
edges, respectively. This weighting scheme performs well empiri-
cally, demonstrated in both DeepSphere [6] and our experiments.
To further describe the geographical directional relationship
between two edge-connected nodes, we deﬁne six directions:
toward high latitude ( jfj"), toward low latitude ( jfj#), westward
(West), eastward (East), Shallower ( r"), and Deeper ( r#), which is
illustrated in Figure 4. The six directions are needed because
the geographical directional relationship matters for planetary
signals such as ocean data. East and West are earth rotation and
counter-earth rotation direction. jfj"andr#are the directions
where solar radiation energy decreases horizontally and vertically,
respectively, and the opposite for direction jfj#and r". A
edge direction set D=fjfj";jfj#;West;East;r";r#gis built
to describe every edge between two connected nodes. Then, the
attribute of an edge (v0;i;v0;j)2E0is represented as an edge
attribute vector GGG000(v0;i;v0;j). To calculate GGG000(v0;i;v0;j), we ﬁrst
deﬁne offset between two nodes v0;iandv0;jas
dx
0=x0;j x0;i;dy
0=y0;j y0;i;dr
0=r0;j r0;i;
dlat
0=jf0;jj jf0;ij;dlng
0=jj(dx
0;dy
0)jj2
r0;i;dh
0=jdlat
0j+jdlng
0j;
wherejj(dx
0;dy
0)jj2is the 2-norm of (dx
0;dy
0). Then, GGG000(v0;i;v0;j) =
(gjfj"
0;gjfj#
0;gwest
0;geast
0;gr"
0;gr#
0)Tis initialized by all zeros and
updated by:
gjfj"
0=w0(v0;i;v0;j)jdlat
0j
dh
0ifdlat
0>0;
gjfj#
0=w0(v0;i;v0;j)jdlat
0j
dh
0ifdlat
0<0;
gwest
0=w0(v0;i;v0;j)jdlng
0j
dh
0if(x0;i;y0;i)T(dx
0;dy
0)T>0;
geast
0=w0(v0;i;v0;j)jdlng
0j
dh
0if(x0;i;y0;i)T(dx
0;dy
0)T<0;
gr"
0=w0(v0;i;v0;j) ifdr
0>0;
gr#
0=w0(v0;i;v0;j) ifdr
0<0;
(2)
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 5
xyz
ABP
y
xB’
A’
(a) (b)O Or
ϕ
θ|ϕ|↑
|ϕ|↑west east|ϕ|↓
|ϕ|↓
Fig. 4. Horizontal Edge Attribute. (a) The horizontal edge (A;B)and
itsjfj"component_
AP. (b) The platform. A0B0is edge (A;B)’s west
component.
whereis the cross product, and we guarantee gjfj"
0+gjfj#
0+
gwest
0+geast
0+gr"
0+gr#
0=w0(v0;i;v0;j)to ensure the sum of vector
components is the edge weight.
For example, in Figure 4, for one horizontal edge (vA;vB), the
edge attribute vector is
GGG000(vA;vB)
= (w0(vA;vB)j_
APj
j_
APj+jA0B0j;0;w0(vA;vB)jA0B0j
j_
APj+jA0B0j;0;0;0)T:
5.2 Graph Hierarchy Generation for Efﬁcient Training
We generate a graph hierarchy for GNN-Surrogate efﬁcient training
by using a graph coarsening algorithm. The graph coarsening
operation receives an input graph Gland outputs the next level
coarser graph Gl+1which has fewer nodes and edges but preserves
the input graph’s topological structures. We repeat the coarsening
process until we are left with a single node in the coarsened graph.
In this work, we use two simple and efﬁcient edge matching
algorithms [28] on horizontal and vertical edges, respectively.
We want to avoid mixing horizontal and vertical edges because,
in coarser graphs, we want to use the same structure for every
spherical layer and have the edges in the coarser graphs be either
horizontal or vertical, but not mixed, as in the original graph G0.
The horizontal matching works as follows: given a graph Gl,
all the nodes are initially marked as unvisited. Starting from the
top horizontal layer, we match a node vl;iwith its cloest horizontal
neighbor vl;j(the one that maximizes wl(vl;i;vl;j)) and generate
one super-node vl+1;kin the next coarser graph Gl+1. The super-
node’s position is the two matched nodes’ great circle midpoint.
If there is no unvisited horizontal neighbor, we copy vl;iitself to
the the coarser graph as the super-node vl+1;k(such as G0node
4 in Figure 5(a)). The one singleton or two matched nodes are
then marked as visited. We repeat the matching process until all
nodes in the top horizontal layer are marked as visited. Figure 5(a)
illustrates the process. We then apply the same strategy for nodes
in other horizontal layers. Given two super-nodes vl+1;iandvl+1;j
inGl+1, if any of vl+1;i’s children and any of vl+1;j’s children
are neighbors, vl+1;iandvl+1;jare considered as neighbors and
an edge is linked between them. We use the same edge attribute
generation and weighting scheme for Gl+1as for the initial graph
G0described in Section 5.1.For vertical matching, we match nodes in the odd horizontal
layers with their neighbors in the deeper layer. If the number of
horizontal layers is odd, the nodes in the deepest horizontal layer
would be singletons. The edge forming, weighting scheme, and
edge attribute generation are the same as the horizontal matching.
Both edge matching algorithms’ time complexity are O(jVlj).
During coarsening, starting from the original graph G0, we
alternately perform horizontal and vertical edge matching to
generate graphs at different resolution levels G1;G2;:::; GL 1.
The graph coarsening details can be found in the supplementary
material. We store all the graphs into a list, which is called the
graph hierarchy. We also store the parent-children links in the
graph hierarchy and construct a graph hierarchical tree (GHT).
Figure 5(b) shows a GHT example. The graph hierarchy is used
for a ﬁnal transformation process to decide the graphs used in our
GNN-Surrogate, described in the next section.
5.3 Hierarchical Tree Cutting
For ocean ensemble simulations, as input parameters change, severe
changes occur only in sub-areas, which means we can represent in-
sensitive regions, where signals slightly change regarding different
simulation parameters, with low resolutions to save memory.
Regions’ sensitivities. We compare simulation outputs with
a reference to model regions’ sensitivities to the input parameter.
We run N1simulations for N1simulation outputs and use the medoid
of these outcomes as the reference. As a learning task, GNN-
Surrogate learns the difference between future simulation outputs
to the reference, where insensitive regions have low difference
values and hence can be represented using low resolutions. When
running a future simulation, an output residual is deﬁned as the
difference between the future simulation output and the reference.
We calculate the difference between the N1simulation outputs and
the reference for N1simulation output residuals.
Graph hierarchical tree cutting. We perform a cutting on
our graph hierarchical tree for each simulation output residual,
such that computation and memory are reduced to support training
GNN-Surrogate given limited computing resources. For example,
in Figure 5(b), nodes above the orange line form a valid cut. The
goal of the tree cutting is to group graph nodes in contiguous
regions that have absolute residual values smaller than a threshold
e; those nodes with smaller absolute residual values will be cut
and represented by their ancestor where an ancestor represents
a group of those nodes. The selection of ecan be found in the
supplementary material. For later data reconstruction, each such
ancestor is attached with one single residual value, which is the
average of the residual values of its leaf descendants. After the
cutting, we call the remaining hierarchical tree C, which has a
property that, if one tree node is in C, all of its ancestors and
siblings are also in C. We determine whether a node is cut or not by
examining whether all its leaf descendants have absolute residual
values smaller than a threshold e. After the remaining tree Cis
generated, we can use its lowest remaining ancestor as a proxy
node to reconstruct the signal of a node being cut. We deﬁne the
proxy node of a cut node vl;jas
yC(vl;j) =vl;jifvl;j2C;
vl0;kotherwise ;
where vl0;k(l0>l)isvl;j’s lowest ancestor in C.
Our next goal is to integrate multiple cuts of different output
residuals into one to build a uniﬁed adaptive-resolution repre-
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 6
01 23 4
5 6(0, 4)
(0, 0) (6, 0)(10, 0)(8, 4)(8, 8)(14, 8)
1112
(4, 1)(11, 7)
13(7.5, 4)G0 G1 G2 G3
(a)
13
11 12
7 10 8 9
0 1 5 6 2 3 4G3
G2
G1
G0
(b)13
11 12
7 10 8 9
5 6 9G3'
G2'
G1'
G0'
(c)7 8789
10(0, 2)(8, 6)
(14, 8)
(8, 0)789
(0, 2)(8, 6)
(14, 8)
(d)G0'
5 6
(6, 0)(10, 0)
Fig. 5. Pipeline of the graph hierarchy generation and graph transformation. (a) Example of the graph coarsening by horizontal edge matching. Given
the original graph G0, horizontal matching is performed for a coarser graph until G3, a graph with an isolated point, is reached. G0,G1,G2,G3form a
graph hierarchy. (b) The graph hierarchical tree (GHT) is created by storing the parent-children links in the graph hierarchy. A GHT cut is generated.
In the example, nodes below the orange curve are cut. (c) Tree view of the transformed graph hierarchy. The transformation is performed based on
the cutting. G0is affected in the transformation. (d) G0
0is transformed from G0.
(v0,0, v0,2, East)  
(v0,0, v0,2, |ϕ|↑) 
(v0,1, v0,2, East)  
(v0,2, v0,2, Self) 
(v0,3, v0,2, |ϕ|↓) 
(v0,4, v0,2, West)  
(v0,4, v0,2, |ϕ|↓) 
(v0,5, v0,2, East)  
(v0,5, v0,2, |ϕ|↑) 
(v0,6, v0,2, West)  
(v0,6, v0,2, |ϕ|↑) 
 
Γ’(v0,0, v0,2, East)U East 
Γ’(v0,0, v0,2, |ϕ|↑)U|ϕ|↑ 
Γ’(v0,1, v0,2, East)U East 
USelf 
Γ’(v0,3, v0,2,|ϕ|↓)U|ϕ|↓ 
Γ’(v0,4, v0,2, West )UWest 
Γ’(v0,4, v0,2, |ϕ|↓)U|ϕ|↓ 
Γ’(v0,5, v0,2, East)U East 
Γ’(v0,5, v0,2, |ϕ|↑)U|ϕ|↑ 
Γ’(v0,6, v0,2, West )UWest 
Γ’(v0,6, v0,2, |ϕ|↑)U|ϕ|↑ 
 
Ω0,0 
Ω0,0 
Ω0,1 
Ω0,2 
Ω0,3 
Ω0,4 
Ω0,4 
Ω0,5 
Ω0,6 
Ω0,6 
Ω0,6 
 avg
Fig. 6. Illustration of graph convolution on G0. The output feature ¡0;2is
computed from a weighted sum of input features on node v0;2and its
neighbors. Each non-zero edge attribute component in edge pointing to
node v0;2corresponds to a weighted matrix, which is the product of the
attribute component G0(v0;j;v0;2;d)and the basis matrix Ud.
sentation for future simulation runs. For ocean simulation, high-
frequency features are usually at speciﬁc locations, such as regions
near the equators where the eastern equatorial Paciﬁc (EEP) cold
tongue happens, making separate cuts similar. The guideline to our
cut integration is that a node vl;jis cut after the integration only if
its parent has the approximating ability for all the residuals. If N1
simulations are run to generate N1residuals for the GHT cut, the
time complexity for generating the GHT cut is O(N1jV0j).
After obtaining the integrated GHT cut, a graph Glis trans-formed into G0
l, where we aggregate nodes and edges. For example,
in Figure 5(c), based on the tree cut shown in Figure 5(b), G0
is transformed into G0
0, as shown in Figure 5(d). Speciﬁcally,
for graphs at each level, we ﬁrst calculate the reduced node set
V0
lby replacing the nodes in Vlwith their proxy nodes. Second,
we generate the new edge set E0
land edge attribute vectors GGG000
lll.
For two proxy nodes pAand pB, if there are edges connecting
nodes whose proxy are pAand nodes whose proxy are pB, then
pAand pBare linked. Each new edge attribute vector is the
average of edge attribute vectors from edges connecting nodes
whose proxy is pAand nodes whose proxy is pB. After the graph
transformation, a transformed graph hierarchy fG0
0;G0
1;:::; G0
L 1g
with an edge attribute vector list fGGG000
000;GGG000
111;:::;GGG000
LLL   111gis generated.
The graph transformation algorithm pseudocode can be found in
the supplementary material.
5.4 Generation of Training Data with Adaptive Resolu-
tions
The training dataset comprises data pairs of input simulation param-
eters and the corresponding residuals with adaptive resolutions. We
have collected N1ensemble members for training when we build
hierarchical tree cuts in Section 5.3. We further run N2simulations
to generate additional training data. For the new N2simulations,
we save the simulation outputs with adaptive resolutions (without
saving full-resolution raw data) to the disk to reduce I/O costs. All
theN1+N2ensemble members constitute the training dataset.
6 A RCHITECTURE AND OPERATIONS
We explain the architecture of GNN-Surrogate and related opera-
tions in this section.
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 7
simulation 
parameters
(m, 256)
(256, 512)
reshape
(in=16k, out=16k)
(in=16k, out=8k)
(in=8k, out=4k)
(in=4k, out=2k)
(in=2k, out=k)
tanh
adaptive 
resolution 
residual
Upsampling
Upsampling
(in, out, 1, 1)
sum
  instance 
normalization
input /output
fully connected
residual block
1D convolution
  ReLU
  others
(512, 512)
(in=8k, out=8k)
(in=k, out=k)
graph convolution
(out, out)
(in, out)
(k, 1)
(|𝐺𝐿−1′|,16𝑘) 
(512,|𝐺𝐿−1′|×16𝑘) 
Fig. 7. Upsampling-convolution generator architecture of GNN-Surrogate.
6.1 Architecture
GNN-Surrogate (denoted as R) is an upsampling-convolution
generator and is trained to generate outputs close to the ground
truth adaptive resolution residuals. The network architecture with
an upsampling-convolution generator proved effective and com-
putationally efﬁcient [3], [29]. Here we provide the architecture
details.
Figure 7 shows the architecture of R, which takes Psimas input
and outputs the adaptive resolution residual data. A forward pass
in GNN-Surrogate contains three steps. First, the input parameter
Psimis fed into fully connected layers to generate a latent vector.
Second, the latent vector is reshaped to a feature map WL 12
RjG0
L 1j16kon the coarsest graph, where the channel multiplier
kis a hyperparameter used to control the network’s size. Third,
the subsequent residual blocks perform super-resolution. A feature
map is ﬁrst upsampled in a residual block and then fed into two
graph convolution layers. Finally, we add an upsampled original
input feature map to the output and send it to the next residual
block. Note that we use Instance Normalization [30] to speed up the
network convergence because Instance Normalization can improve
generative models since it can maintain independence between
each data instance. The rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) [31] is used as
the activation function in all layers except the last layer. The tanh
activation function is applied in the last layer to normalize output
signals into [ 1;1].
6.2 Graph Convolution
A convolution operation convolves the input feature map using a
convolution layer and passes the result to the next layer. Figure 6
provides an example of the deﬁned graph convolution. We deﬁne
a graph convolution on the constructed graphs as follows. On
graph G0
l, the convolution operation transforms input feature map
Wl2RjV0
ljcinto an output feature map ¡l2RjV0
ljcout, where cin
andcoutare input and output feature maps’ channel numbers. An
output feature ¡l;i2Rcoutis computed from a weighted sum of
input features on node vl;iand all of its neighboring nodes.
We use an edge-conditioned convolution operation formalized
as below:
¡l;i=1
jh(l;i)j+1(USel fWl;i+å
(vl;j;vl;i;d)2h(l;i)GGG000
lll(vl;j;vl;i;d)UdWl;j);
(3)
where h(l;i) =f(vl;j;vl;i;d)jGGG000
lll(vl;j;vl;i;d)>0gis an edge set
containing all the edges pointing to node vl;i,cinand coutare
channel numbers of the input and output features maps, and Ud2Rcoutcin(d2D)andUsel f2Rcoutcinare weighted basis matrices
in a convolution layer. In each convolution layer, we use different
weighted basis matrices conditioned on neighbors at different
directions in Equation 3. In our experiments, we ﬁnd that our
model’s learning ability increases by exploiting the geographical
directional relationship between two edge-connected nodes.
In our implementation, we ﬁrst perform linear transformation
for the input feature map by dense matrix-vector multiplication,
which costs O(jV0
ljcincout)operations. Then we perform the
weighted sum by sparse matrix-vector multiplication, which has a
cost of O(jE0
ljcout)operations. We perform matrix multiplication
operations in parallel for efﬁcient computations by the support of
PyTorch Sparse [32] library.
6.3 Graph Upsampling
This section deﬁnes graph upsampling to transform feature maps
between graphs of different resolution levels.
We upsample a graph of level mto a graph of level l, where
m>l. The value of a node at level lequals the ancestor at level
m. Given a feature map Wm2RjV0mjcon graph G0
m, the graph
upsampling outputs ¡l2RjV0
ljcon graph G0
l, such that
¡l;i=Wm;j:vm;j2V0
mis the ancestor of vl;i2V0
lin the GHT ;(4)
where cis the channel number of the feature map.
Our graph upsampling operations can be implemented by
multiplying an input feature map by a sparse matrix that with
jV0
ljcitems. Upsampling operations on the whole input feature
map costs O(jV0
ljc)operations. The same as Section 6.2, we
perform matrix multiplication operations in parallel for efﬁcient
computations by the support of PyTorch Sparse [32] library.
6.4 Training Process
In the training process, we update the network parameters in
GNN-Surrogate using gradient descent. We also explain other used
methods during training as follows.
Loss Function During training, we iteratively update pa-
rameters in GNN-Surrogate to minimize a loss function. Our loss
function is a L1loss:
L1=1
bb 1
å
i=0jjˆSar;i Sar;ijj1; (5)
where bis the batch size, Sar;0:b 1and ˆSar;0:b 1are ground truth
and generated adaptive resolution residual. The loss can guide Rto
produce results with high accuracy.
Training Techniques We improve the training stability
and efﬁciency using two additional techniques. First, We apply
spectral normalization [33] to stabilize our GNN-Surrogate training.
Second, training a deep generative model for large-scale data is
memory costly and slow. Thus, we train GNN-Surrogate with mixed
precision [34], which can reduce the memory cost of training and
the time it takes to train with minimal impact. The details of our
training techniques can be found in the supplementary material.
6.5 Inference Process and Sensitivity Analysis
In the inference stage, a new simulation input parameter setting
is fed into GNN-Surrogate. After a forward pass, we obtain an
adaptive resolution residual. We convert the adaptive resolution
residual to a residual with the full resolution by nearest neighbor
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 8
sampling. Finally, we get the predicted simulation output by adding
the reference onto the residual.
Inspired by previous works [3], [35], we exploit GNN-
Surrogate’s differentiability to perform sensitivity analysis on
simulation parameters. We aggregate the predicted ﬁeld (e.g., L1
norm of the data values) to obtain a scalar value and compute
the derivative of that scalar value with respect to one selected
parameter. The absolute value of the derivative can be used as
an indicator for one parameter’s sensitivity since it reﬂects how
the ﬁeld changes as the input simulation parameter change. While
analyzing one selected parameter, we ﬁx the other parameters
and perform uniform sampling in the selected parameter’s value
range. For each sample point, forward propagation and backward
propagation are conducted to obtain a sensitivity value. We use a
line chart to visualize the list of sensitivity values.
7 R ESULTS
The evaluation for our proposed GNN-Surrogate is broken up
into three sections: (1) implementation details and performance
(Section 7.2); (2) quantitative and qualitative analyses comparing
our approach with baseline approaches (Section 7.3); (3) parameter
space exploration case studies and further analysis (Section 7.4).
7.1 Ensemble Simulation Running Settings
MPAS-Ocean is designed for the simulation of the global ocean
system. Based on the scientist’s suggestion, we studied four
parameters: the amplitude of the ocean surface wind stress
(BwsA2[0:0;5:0]), the magnitude of the Gent McWilliams
mesoscale eddy parameterization ( GM2[600:0;1500:0]), the
critical bulk Richardson number (used to determine the strength
of vertical mixing) ( CbrN2[0:25;1:00]), and horizontal viscos-
ity (HV2[100:0;300:0]). We randomly sampled 100 parameter
settings from the parameter space and randomly picked 70 for
training and 30 for testing. 15-model-day ocean simulations were
conducted with each parameter setting, and unstructured grids
with EC60to30 resolution representing the ocean temperature were
generated. An MPAS-Ocean mesh structure contains 60 horizontal
layers, and each horizontal layer consists of 235,160 V oronoi
cells. One generated ensemble member takes 1.00 GB space
with a temperature ﬁeld of size 107.65 MB within it. Among
the 70 ensemble members in the training dataset, 16 were used for
generating the hierarchy cutting policy described in Section 5.3.
7.2 Implementation and Performance
Graph preparation, including graph hierarchy generation and
graph transformation The graph preparation was implemented
in C++, and the graph is represented with Eigen SparseMatrix.
Our graph preparation was computed on an Intel Xeon E5-
2680 CPU. The graph construction and graph coarsening took 25.9
minutes. The graph transformation took 6.18 minutes. The graph
preparation is only related to the mesh structure and independent of
simulation outputs, so only one graph preparation was performed.
Simulation runs and data collection The simulations were
conducted on a supercomputer with 648 computation nodes. Each
node contains an Intel Xeon E5-2680 CPU with 28 cores and 128
GB memory. We used 128 processes for our simulation, and it took
49.6 minutes per simulation. After the simulation, the size of an
output adaptive resolution temperature ﬁeld varies given different
GHT cut thresholds and is reported in the supplementary material.GNN-Surrogate training and inference GNN-Surrogate
was implemented in PyTorch [36]. The training and testing of
GNN-Surrogate were on one NVIDIA V olta V100 GPU 16GB. We
ﬁxed the GNN-Surrogate training time to 36hours. After training,
a single forward pass through the trained GNN-Surrogate takes less
than 2 seconds, instead of the roughly 50 minutes it would take to
directly compute the simulation output on a large cluster of CPUs.
7.3 Comparison with Baseline Approaches
7.3.1 Evaluation Metrics
Data-level metrics GNN-Surrogate allows scientists to use
any visual mapping parameters of interest to the reconstructed
simulation output, so it is necessary to evaluate the predicted
simulation output’s quality at the data level. We used peak signal-
to-noise ratio (PSNR) to measure the grid-level difference, and
normalized maximum difference (MD) for the error bound.
Geometry-level metrics The isothermal layer (ITL) depth
reﬂects the local ocean temperature and spatial variability from
a geometric perspective. In this work, we compute speciﬁc ITL
depths and calculated measures of overlap (Jaccard coefﬁcient, JC)
and the mean surface distance of intersection regions to evaluate
the quality of ITL depths.
Image-level metrics At the image level, horizontal and
vertical cross-section images were rendered. We ﬁxed the depth,
latitude, or longitude and used the Kindlmann colormap [37]
to establish a correspondence between the color and the ocean
temperature. Structural similarity index measure (SSIM) and earth
mover’s distance (EMD) between color histograms [3], [35] were
used to quantify the structural and distributional similarity between
two rendered images.
We evaluated both global and speciﬁc regions of interest (ROI).
For ROI evaluation, we extracted a region within 160Wto80E,
26Sto26N, and sea level to a depth of 200 meters, which is the
location of the eastern equatorial Paciﬁc cold tongue. At the image
level evaluation, the resolution of images depends on its target
region, 1024512for images of a global region, and 420180
for images of an ROI.
7.3.2 Baselines
The baseline methods we chose to compare with are inverse
distance weighting (IDW) interpolation for comparison on all
analyses, radial basis function (RBF) interpolation for comparison
of data-based analyses, and the image-based method InSituNet [3]
for comparison of image-based analyses. The reasons we selected
IDW interpolation as the baseline method are twofold. First, IDW
is one of the most commonly used interpolation methods for
scientiﬁc data analysis [38]. Second, IDW interpolation has a
low computation cost and is straightforward to interpret [39].
Radial basis function (RBF) interpolation is a more complicated
interpolation method and is also widely used for scientiﬁc data [40].
We used Gaussian distribution as the radial basis function and used
backward propagation for the optimization. We selected InSituNet
for comparison of image-based analyses because it is the state-of-
the-art image-based method. For the IDW interpolation method,
we searched the training dataset, sampled gdata instances whose
parameter settings have the minimum Manhattan distance to the test
data, and applied the weighted sum. Values of gfrom 1 to 5 were
evaluated, and we present the results for g=3since it balances
the metrics in three levels (more results are in the supplementary
material). The CPU time required to get an interpolated result is
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 9
TABLE 1
Quantitative comparison of the output predicted with GNN-Surrogate,
radial basis function (RBF) interpolation, and inverse distance weighting
(IDW) interpolation.
GNN-Surrogate IDW Interp RBF Interp
PSNR (global, dB) 50.7, 2.52 47.7, 5.72 32.43, 8.91
MD (global) 0.1965, 0.0415 0.1721, 0.0562 0.1397, 0.0398
PSNR (ROI, dB) 39.5, 3.06 33.6, 6.03 27.43, 7.27
MD (ROI) 0.1774, 0.0332 0.1673, 0.0672 0.1573 , 0.0605
params (GB) 2.18 7.18 10.27
Fig. 8. The box plot showing the PSNR deviation on global and ROI
temperature maps from 30 different testing ensemble members.
around 1.3 seconds, which is a little smaller than a single forward
pass time through the trained GNN-Surrogate. For InSituNet, since
it is an image-based method, it does not support data level or
geometric level comparison, nor does it support multiple visual
mappings. Thus, we only rendered the horizontal cross-sections
with a ﬁxed color mapping as the target output of InSituNet. The
corresponding simulation parameters and depth were incorporated
as the input parameters.
7.3.3 Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis Results
The evaluation results are presented from three perspectives: (1)
data-level analysis using Table 1 and Figure 8, (2) geometry-level
analysis using Figure 10(d) and Figure 9(e, f), and (3) image-level
analysis using Figure 10(a-c) and Figure 9(a-d).
Data-level analysis In Table 1, we quantitatively compared
GNN-Surrogate results against interpolations at the data level
(PSNR and MD) both globally and in the ROI. We found
that globally, the GNN-Surrogate produces higher PSNR than
interpolations. GNN-Surrogate has a worse normalized maximum
difference than interpolations, which is explainable because our loss
function does not constrain the error bound. Both interpolations and
GNN-Surrogate have lower PSNR in the ROI than global PSNR
because the ROI contains complex phenomena. GNN-Surrogate
achieves a relatively higher PSNR than interpolation methods for
the ROI compared to the entire domain. GNN-Surrogate is more
stable than interpolations since it usually has a smaller standard
variance. To illustrate that, we give PSNR box plots in Figure 8.
Although sometimes interpolations may give better prediction
results than GNN-Surrogate, they have worse lower quartiles and
medians, making them less trustworthy.
Geometry-Level analysis We sampled temperature isoval-
ues from 25Cto5Cand computed the ITL depth. In Figure 9
(e, f) the quantitative results are shown. We arrange temperature
from large to small in the ﬁgure because ocean temperature
usually monotonically decreases as the depth increases, so a larger
temperature isovalue leads to a smaller depth. GNN-Surrogate has
a smaller mean surface distance than IDW interpolation when the
temperature is higher than 15C. The distance is always smaller
than ten meters, which is good considering that the ocean’s mean
depth is 5.5km. Note that as temperature decreases, there is a
rapid upward trend for the GNN-Surrogate’s mean surface distance,
while for IDW interpolation, the mean surface distance graduallydecreases. We believe the rapid upward trend is because of the
lower vertical resolution in the deeper ocean. Meanwhile, the
temperature is not sensitive to any input parameters in this region,
so IDW interpolation can still do a good job. For the surface overlap,
evaluated by Jaccard Coefﬁcient, GNN-Surrogate is slightly better
than IDW interpolation until they both become almost perfect when
the temperature goes below 19C.
In Figure 10(d), we compared rendering results of the 25CITL
depth generated by IDW interpolation and GNN-Surrogate using
the Extended Kindlmann colormap [41]. GNN-Surrogate generates
a depth map close to the ground truth. In the depth map generated
by IDW interpolation, there is a large gap across the equator in
the eastern Paciﬁc. The depth map rendering does not always give
enough information. For example, we do not know why there is a
strange gap.
Image-Level analysis Apart from the rendering using the
Kindlmann colormap, inspired by some previous work [42],
[43], difference images are given to display the noticeable pixel
differences (with4 6:0 in the CIELUV color space).
We rendered different horizontal cross-sections from the sea
surface to the seabed. First, in Figure 9(a), GNN-Surrogate
outperforms InSituNet, reﬂected from higher SSIM and lower EMD.
Second, although GNN-Surrogate performs well, it is slightly worse
than IDW interpolation for the global region at some depths. We
think this is because the temperature is not sensitive to any input
parameters not only in the deep ocean but also at many locations
close to the sea level. To illustrate that, we calculate SSIM and EMD
for ocean maps in the ROI and ﬁnd that GNN-Surrogate achieves
higher SSIM at most depths and always has lower EMD, as seen
in 9(b). Figure 10(a) shows the sea level rendering results. GNN-
Surrogate accurately reﬂects the ocean temperature, while IDW
interpolation incorrectly predicts temperatures of the equatorial
cold tongue (i.e., predicted temperatures are much lower than the
ground truth), which explains why we ﬁnd a large gap in the
25CITL depth. InSituNet has two major limitations. First, since
it directly predicts the image, we cannot easily add isotherms to
aid visualization. Moreover, it cannot preserve interesting features,
such as the equatorial cold tongue, well.
We give the vertical cross-sections of the temperature ﬁeld as
well. In ﬁgure 9(c, d), we observe that IDW interpolation generates
images with higher SSIM and lower EMD. We claim that ocean
temperature usually monotonically decreases as depth increases,
which makes the vertical cross-sections featureless. Despite that, in
some particular regions, GNN-Surrogate can be more trustworthy.
For example, in Figure 10(b), the vertical cross-section from the
equator, we can see IDW interpolation predicts the temperature
to be lower than the ground truth in the Paciﬁc near the sea level.
In Figure 10(c), a vertical cross-section from 75E, we ﬁnd that
IDW interpolation predicts the temperature to be lower near the
continent at around 10N. GNN-Surrogate performs better on these
two examples.
7.4 Case Study: Parameter Space Exploration
In this section, a scientist (one of our coauthors) who has 15
years of ocean science experience exploited GNN-Surrogate to
do a parameter space exploration on an MPAS-Ocean simulation
forced by an annual averaged wind stress and restoring of surface
temperature and salinity to climatology.
First, he probed the sensitivity to different parameters. Un-
der the parameter setting BwsA =2:5;GM=900:0;CbrN =
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 10
* The higher SSIM , the better quality . The lower EMD , the better quality .
* The smaller distance , the better quality . The higher JC , the better quality .
(a) Global Horizontal Cross -section
 (b) ROI Horizontal Cross -section
(c) Global Latitude Cross -section
 (d) Global Longitude Cross -section
(e) Global Isothermal Layer (ITL) Depth
 (f) ROI Isothermal Layer (ITL) Depth
Fig. 9. (a-b) SSIM and EMD for temperature horizontal cross-sections at different depths. (c) SSIM and EMD for vertical cross-sections at different
latitudes. (d) SSIM and EMD for vertical cross-sections at different longitudes. (e-f) Average distance and Jaccard Coefﬁcient (JC) for the isothermal
layer (ITL) depth maps with different temperature isovalues.
GNNSurro
GNNSurro
GNNSurro
Ground 
Truth
GNNSurro
IDW Interp
InSituNetdifference image map
IDW Interp
 Ground Truth
IDW Interp
 Ground Truth
(b)
(c)
Kindlmann
(a)
IDW Interp
 Ground Truth
(d)extend Kindlmann
Fig. 10. (a) Comparison of the sea level temperature maps generated using GNN-Surrogate, IDW interpolation, and InSituNet with the ground truth
maps. Comparison of the vertical cross-sections at (b) the equator (c) 75Egenerated using GNN-Surrogate and IDW interpolation with the ground
truth cross-sections. (d) Comparison of the isothermal layer (ITL) depth maps with temperature isovalue 25Cgenerated using GNN-Surrogate and
IDW interpolation with the ground truth maps.
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 11
Fig. 11. The sensitivity line graph visualization of different simulation
parameters.
0:625;HV=200:0, he computed the sensitivity of each variable
in turn, as suggested in Section 6.5. The results are shown in
Figure 11. Considering the scale of the four plots, he ranked
variable sensitivity: BwsA>CrbN >GM>HV.
Next, he examined how BwsA , the most sensitive parameter,
affects the ocean temperature. He ﬁxed GM=900:0;CbrN =
0:625;HV=200:0, and sampled BwsA fromf0:0;1:0;3:0;5:0g. As
shown in Figure 12, he ﬁrst visualized the sea surface temperature
map. Based on the observation, as he scaled up the amplitude
wind stress, the equatorial cold tongue in the eastern Paciﬁc is
signiﬁcantly enhanced. This phenomenon is physically expected
as the trade winds, which blow from east to west, push the warm
ocean surface water toward the western Paciﬁc, exposing the cooler
surface waters below. Further, the increased wind leads to the
upwelling of colder subsurface water along the equator due to the
Coriolis force. These two processes lead to a stronger equatorial
cold tongue. To verify this point, he rendered the east Paciﬁc
equatorial cross-section from the sea level to a depth of 200 meters,
as shown in Figure 12. As the wind stress becomes strong, more
cold water in the deeper ocean is upwelled to the surface.
8 D ISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS
We compare our method with an image-based surrogate model
InSituNet [3] and list two limitations of our method in this section.
We addressed all the three limitations reported in InSituNet:
(1) insufﬁcient ﬂexibility when exploring arbitrary visual mapping
parameters; (2) low accuracy of predicted images; (3) low reso-
lution of predicted images. For the ﬁrst limitation of InSituNet,
instead of considering the huge joint space of all the simulation and
visualization parameters, GNN-Surrogate predicts the simulation
output ﬁrst. Using adaptive resolutions for MPAS-Ocean data, our
training dataset size is 3.13GB, smaller than InSituNet’s training
data requirement (3.46GB). After simulation outputs are predicted,
various existing visualization algorithms can be used for rendering.
For the second and third limitations of InSituNet, we exploit the fact
that all the ensemble members share the same mesh structure, which
does not need to be learned. Meanwhile, GNN-Surrogate builds
adaptive resolutions for simulation outputs, which signiﬁcantly
reduces the training difﬁculty. For the training dataset generation,
compared with InSituNet, GNN-Surrogate requires fewer ensemble
runs (70 versus 270) and learns more input parameters (4 versus 1).
With the high quality of the predicted simulation output, accuracy
and resolution of rendered images are improved signiﬁcantly, which
were validated by our experiments.
GNN-Surrogate has two limitations that we want to research
for the solution in the future: (1) long ofﬂine training time and
(2) limited sensitivity estimation before the model is trained. First,
the ofﬂine training time of GNN-Surrogate takes 36hours. Thanks
to the advancement of high-performance machine learning, we
Fig. 12. Comparison of the sea level temperature map and equator
vertical cross-sections using different BwsA values to see the effect of
the amplitude wind stress. As the wind stress becomes strong ( BwsA
value becomes high), the equatorial cold tongue in the eastern Paciﬁc
is signiﬁcantly enhanced, and more cold water in the deeper ocean is
upwelled to the surface.
plan to train our GNN-Surrogate with multiple GPUs using the
data-parallel technique provided by PyTorch [36] to speed up the
training in the future. Second, to estimate the sensitivity of regions
for building adaptive resolutions, we only select one reference by
selecting the medoid of the ﬁrst N1simulation outputs. Considering
the complexity of the simulation parameter space, one reference
may not always be representative of modeling the sensitivities of
regions against other ensemble members. In the future, we plan
to compute region’s sensitivities from multiple simulation outputs
as references for a more accurate sensitivity estimation to model
adaptive resolutions.
9 C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we propose GNN-Surrogate, a deep surrogate model
to support analysis and visualization of ocean ensemble simulations.
GNN-Surrogate is based on a graph neural network for learning
on data represented with unstructured grids, and adaptive data
resolution is applied for GPU memory efﬁciency. In the inference
stage, GNN-Surrogate is fed with input parameters, and the
output can be converted to the full resolution by simple post-
processing. Scientists can apply existing visualization algorithms
to the reconstructed data and conduct a thorough analysis. We
render horizontal and vertical cross-sections and ITL depth maps
and give comprehensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations to
demonstrate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of GNN-Surrogate.
Future work In Section 6.5, we used nearest neighbor
sampling to convert the predicted adaptive resolution result to
full resolution. Although it worked well in our experiments, in
the future, we plan to research on neural network-based super-
resolution method to further improve GNN-Surrogate’s quality. In
Section 7.3.2, we chose a computationally cheap and straightfor-
ward inverse distance weighting interpolation and a more advanced
radial basis function interpolation as baseline methods. Some other
techniques like Kriging can also be considered. However, Kriging
is a geostatistical approach that requires calculating corresponding
interpolation coefﬁcients from sampled temperature values for
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 12
each spatial location. Considering that the number of spatial grid
points in one ensemble member is very high ( 107), Kriging is not
appropriate as the comparison baseline due to a high computation
cost. In the future, we would like to explore interpolation techniques
that have higher performance and competitive computational cost.
We would also like to extend GNN-Surrogate to time-varying
data by employing 4D convolutions, time-space graphs and trees.
Outside ocean simulations, GNN-Surrogate can also be useful for
other datasets. However, in that case, our adaptive data resolution
method may not work well since different ensemble members may
not have features at the same location. We consider using another
model to learn the graph transformation strategy and guide our
adaptive data resolution to overcome this challenge.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation
Division of Information and Intelligent Systems-1955764, the Na-
tional Science Foundation Ofﬁce of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure-
2112606, U.S. Department of Energy Los Alamos National Labo-
ratory contract 47145, and UT-Battelle LLC contract 4000159447
program manager Margaret Lentz. This work is also supported
in part by the SciDAC program funded by the U.S. Department
of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing
Research. This research used resources of the Argonne Leadership
Computing Facility, which is a DOE Ofﬁce of Science User Facility
supported under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Wang, S. Hazarika, C. Li, and H.-W. Shen, “Visualization and
Visual Analysis of Ensemble Data: A Survey,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 2853–2872,
2018.
[2] J. Wang, X. Liu, H.-W. Shen, and G. Lin, “Multi-Resolution Climate
Ensemble Parameter Analysis with Nested Parallel Coordinates Plots,”
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 81–90, 2016.
[3] W. He, J. Wang, H. Guo, K.-C. Wang, H.-W. Shen, M. Raj, Y . S.
Nashed, and T. Peterka, “InSituNet: Deep Image Synthesis for Parameter
Space Exploration of Ensemble Simulations,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 23–33, 2019.
[4] S. Hazarika, H. Li, K.-C. Wang, H.-W. Shen, and C.-S. Chou, “NNV A:
Neural Network Assisted Visual Analysis of Yeast Cell Polarization
Simulation,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics ,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 34–44, 2019.
[5] K. Alden, J. Cosgrove, M. Coles, and J. Timmis, “Using Emulation to
Engineer and Understand Simulations of Biological Systems,” IEEE/ACM
transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics , vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 302–315, 2018.
[6] N. Perraudin, M. Defferrard, T. Kacprzak, and R. Sgier, “DeepSphere: Ef-
ﬁcient Spherical Convolutional Neural Network with HEALPix Sampling
for Cosmological Applications,” Astronomy and Computing , vol. 27, pp.
130–146, 2019.
[7] M. Defferrard, N. Perraudin, T. Kacprzak, and R. Sgier, “DeepSphere:
Towards an Equivariant Graph-Based Spherical CNN,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.05146 , 2019.
[8] T. Pfaff, M. Fortunato, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, and P. W. Battaglia,
“Learning Mesh-Based Simulation with Graph Networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.03409 , 2020.
[9] T. Ringler, M. Petersen, R. L. Higdon, D. Jacobsen, P. W. Jones, and
M. Maltrud, “A Multi-Resolution Approach to Global Ocean Modeling,”
Ocean Modelling , vol. 69, pp. 211–232, 2013.
[10] Q. Wang, Z. Chen, Y . Wang, and H. Qu, “A Survey on ML4VIS: Applying
Machine Learning Advances to Data Visualization,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 2021.
[11] A. Bock, A. Pembroke, M. L. Mays, L. Rastaetter, T. Ropinski, and A. Yn-
nerman, “Visual Veriﬁcation of Space Weather Ensemble Simulations,” in
Proc. IEEE Scientiﬁc Visualization Conference (SciVis) . IEEE, 2015, pp.
17–24.[12] J. Poco, A. Dasgupta, Y . Wei, W. Hargrove, C. R. Schwalm, D. N.
Huntzinger, R. Cook, E. Bertini, and C. T. Silva, “Visual Reconciliation of
Alternative Similarity Spaces in Climate Modeling,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 1923–1932,
2014.
[13] A. Biswas, G. Lin, X. Liu, and H.-W. Shen, “Visualization of Time-
Varying Weather Ensembles across Multiple Resolutions,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 841–850,
2016.
[14] H. Obermaier, K. Bensema, and K. I. Joy, “Visual Trends Analysis in Time-
Varying ensembles,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics , vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 2331–2342, 2015.
[15] D. Orban, D. F. Keefe, A. Biswas, J. Ahrens, and D. Rogers, “Drag
and Track: A Direct Manipulation Interface for Contextualizing Data
Instances within a Continuous Parameter Space,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 256–266, 2018.
[16] R. Splechtna, K. Matkovi ´c, D. Gra ˇcanin, M. Jelovi ´c, and H. Hauser,
“Interactive Visual Steering of Hierarchical Simulation Ensembles,” in
Proc. IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST) . IEEE, 2015, pp. 89–96.
[17] K. Matkovic, D. Gracanin, B. Klarin, and H. Hauser, “Interactive Visual
Analysis of Complex Scientiﬁc Data as Families of Data Surfaces,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 15, no. 6, pp.
1351–1358, 2009.
[18] S. Bruckner and T. M ¨oller, “Result-Driven Exploration of Simulation
Parameter Spaces for Visual Effects Design,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1468–1476,
2010.
[19] H. Chen, S. Zhang, W. Chen, H. Mei, J. Zhang, A. Mercer, R. Liang, and
H. Qu, “Uncertainty-Aware Multidimensional Ensemble Data Visualiza-
tion and Exploration,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics , vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1072–1086, 2015.
[20] D. Coffey, C.-L. Lin, A. G. Erdman, and D. F. Keefe, “Design by Dragging:
An Interface for Creative Forward and Inverse Design with Simulation
Ensembles,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics ,
vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2783–2791, 2013.
[21] N. M. Urban and T. E. Fricker, “A Comparison of Latin Hypercube and
Grid Ensemble Designs for the Multivariate Emulation of an Earth System
Model,” Computers & Geosciences , vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 746–755, 2010.
[22] D. Erdal, S. Xiao, W. Nowak, and O. A. Cirpka, “Sampling Behavioral
Model Parameters for Ensemble-Based Sensitivity Analysis Using Gaus-
sian Process Emulation and Active Subspaces,” Stochastic Environmental
Research and Risk Assessment , vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 1813–1830, 2020.
[23] M. Simonovsky and N. Komodakis, “Dynamic Edge-Conditioned Filters
in Convolutional Neural Networks on Graphs,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2017, pp.
3693–3702.
[24] D. Valsesia, G. Fracastoro, and E. Magli, “Learning Localized Represen-
tations of Point Clouds With Graph-Convolutional Generative Adversarial
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol. 23, pp. 402–414, 2020.
[25] S. Lan, R. Yu, G. Yu, and L. S. Davis, “Modeling Local Geometric
Structure of 3D Point Clouds using Geo-CNN,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2019,
pp. 998–1008.
[26] M. Petersen, “MPAS-Ocean V6 Run Directories,” May 2018. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1252437
[27] J. Feld, “Plane and Spherical Trigonometry,” 1940.
[28] I. S. Dhillon, Y . Guan, and B. Kulis, “Weighted Graph Cuts without
Eigenvectors a Multilevel Approach,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1944–1957, 2007.
[29] P. Isola, J.-Y . Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image Translation
with Conditional Adversarial Networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2017, pp. 1125–
1134.
[30] D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, and V . Lempitsky, “Instance Normalization: The
Missing Ingredient for Fast Stylization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022 ,
2016.
[31] V . Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectiﬁed Linear Units Improve Restricted
Boltzmann Machines,” in Proceedings of the 27th International Con-
ference on International Conference on Machine Learning , 2010, pp.
807–814.
[32] M. Fey, “PyTorch Sparse,” https://github.com/rusty1s/pytorch sparse,
2021.
[33] T. Miyato, T. Kataoka, M. Koyama, and Y . Yoshida, “Spectral Normal-
ization for Generative Adversarial Networks,” in Proc. International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 13
[34] P. Micikevicius, S. Narang, J. Alben, G. Diamos, E. Elsen, D. Garcia,
B. Ginsburg, M. Houston, O. Kuchaiev, G. Venkatesh et al. , “Mixed
Precision Training,” in Proc. International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2018.
[35] M. Berger, J. Li, and J. A. Levine, “A Generative Model for V olume
Rendering,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics ,
vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1636–1650, 2018.
[36] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen,
Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al. , “PyTorch: An Imperative
Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
[37] G. Kindlmann, E. Reinhard, and S. Creem, “Face-Based Luminance
Matching for Perceptual Colormap Generation,” in Proc. IEEE Visualiza-
tion. IEEE, 2002, pp. 299–306.
[38] F.-W. Chen and C.-W. Liu, “Estimation of the Spatial Rainfall Distribution
Using Inverse Distance Weighting (IDW) in the Middle of Taiwan,” Paddy
and Water Environment , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 209–222, 2012.
[39] G. Y . Lu and D. W. Wong, “An Adaptive Inverse-Distance Weighting
Spatial Interpolation Technique,” Computers & geosciences , vol. 34, no. 9,
pp. 1044–1055, 2008.
[40] S. M. Wild, R. G. Regis, and C. A. Shoemaker, “ORBIT: Optimization by
Radial Basis Function Interpolation in Trust-Regions,” SIAM Journal on
Scientiﬁc Computing , vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 3197–3219, 2008.
[41] K. Moreland, “Why We Use Bad Color Maps and What You Can Do
about It,” Electronic Imaging , vol. 2016, no. 16, pp. 1–6, 2016.
[42] J. Han and C. Wang, “TSR-TVD: Temporal Super-Resolution for
Time-Varying Data Analysis and Visualization,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 205–215, 2019.
[43] J. Han, H. Zheng, Y . Xing, D. Z. Chen, and C. Wang, “V2V: A Deep
Learning Approach to Variable-to-Variable Selection and Translation for
Multivariate Time-Varying Data,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics , vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 1290–1300, 2020.
Neng Shi is a Ph.D. student in the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering at the Ohio
State University. He received his B.S. degree in
Geographic Information Science from Zhejiang
University in 2018. His research interest include
large-scale scientiﬁc data visualization, ensem-
ble simulation data visualization, and machine
learning for scientiﬁc visualization.
Jiayi Xu is a research scientist at Meta AI. His
research interests include high-performance data
analysis, visualization, and machine learning. He
is the recipient of the best paper award in the
14th IEEE Paciﬁc Visualization Symposium. He
received his Ph.D. degree in computer science
and engineering from The Ohio State University
in 2021 and his B.E. degree in computer science
and technology from Chu Kochen Honors College
of Zhejiang University in 2014.
Skylar W. Wurster is a 3rd year Ph.D. student
studying under Professor Han-Wei Shen as part
of his GRAVITY research group at The Ohio
State University in Columbus, Ohio. He also
collaborates with mentors Hanqi Guo and Tom
Peterka at Argonne National Lab in Lemont,
Illinois. His research interests span deep learn-
ing, scientiﬁc data visualization, and computer
games/graphics.
Hanqi Guo is a computer scientist at Argonne
National Laboratory, scientist at the University
of Chicago Consortium for Advanced Science
and Engineering (CASE), and fellow of the North-
western Argonne Institute for Science and Engi-
neering (NAISE). His research interests include
data analysis, visualization, and machine learning
for scientiﬁc data. He is the recipient of multiple
best paper awards in IEEE VIS, IEEE PaciﬁcVis,
and ChinaVis. He received his Ph.D. degree in
computer science from Peking University in 2014
and his B.S. degree in mathematics and applied mathematics from Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2009.
Jonathan Woodring received the PhD degree
in computer science from Ohio State University
in 2009, his specialization in computer graphics
and scientiﬁc visualization. He is a research
scientist at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.
His research areas focus on data science at
scale, scientiﬁc supercomputing, the intersection
of high-performance and cloud computing, future
power grids, and ocean climate modeling.
Luke P. Van Roekel is currently a research sci-
entist in the climate, ocean, and sea-ice modeling
group at LANL and is the co-lead developer of
the MPAS-Ocean model, the ocean component
of the DOE’s new Exascale EnergyEarth System
Model (E3SM) and is a science focus group co-
lead on the E3SM project. Some of his research
interests include ocean surface boundary layer
turbulence, large scale earth system dynamics,
ocean-atmosphere coupling phenomena, and
parameterization of these processes for earth
system models. Before joining LANL he was an assistant professor of
atmospheric science at a liberal arts college in Wisconsin.
Han-Wei Shen is a full professor at the Ohio
State University. He received his B.S. degree from
the Department of Computer Science and Infor-
mation Engineering at National Taiwan University
in 1988, his M.S. degree in computer science
from the State University of New York at Stony
Brook in 1992, and his Ph.D. degree in computer
science from the University of Utah in 1998. From
1996 to 1999, he was a research scientist at
NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View
California. His primary research interests are
scientiﬁc visualization and computer graphics. He is a winner of the
National Science Foundation’s CAREER award and U.S. Department
of Energy’s Early Career Principal Investigator Award. He also won
the Outstanding Teaching award twice in the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering at the Ohio State University.
