A Deep-Learning Usability Expansion Model of
Ocean Observations
Ali Muhamed Ali,1Hanqi Zhuang,1Yu Huang,1
Ali K. Ibrahim,2Ali Salem Altaher,1Laurent Chérubin2
1Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Florida Atlantic University,
Boca Raton, FL, USA,
2Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute, Florida Atlantic University, FL, USA
Ali Muhamed Ali; E-mail: amuhamedali2014@fau.edu.
Today’s ocean numerical prediction skills depend on the availability of in-situ
and remote ocean observations at the time of the predictions only. Because ob-
servations are scarce and discontinuous in time and space, numerical models
are often unable to accurately model and predict real ocean dynamics, leading
to a lack of fulﬁllment of a range of services that require reliable predictions
at various temporal and spatial scales. The process of constraining free nu-
merical models with observations is known as data assimilation. The primary
objective is to minimize the misﬁt of model states with the observations while
respecting the rules of physics. The caveat of this approach is that measure-
ments are used only once, at the time of the prediction. The information con-
tained in the history of the measurements and its role in the determinism of the
prediction is, therefore, not accounted for. Consequently, historical measure-
ment cannot be used in real-time forecasting systems. The research presented
1arXiv:2206.01599v1  [eess.SP]  3 Jun 2022
in this paper provides a novel approach rooted in artiﬁcial intelligence to ex-
pand the usability of observations made before the time of the prediction. Our
approach is based on the re-purpose of an existing deep learning model, called
U-Net, designed speciﬁcally for image segmentation analysis in the biomedical
ﬁeld. U-Net is used here to create a Transform Model that retains the tempo-
ral and spatial evolution of the differences between model and observations to
produce a correction in the form of regression weights that evolves spatially
and temporally with the model both forward and backward in time, beyond
the observation period. Using virtual observations, we show that the usability
of the observation can be extended up to a one year prior or post observations.
Introduction
Today’s ocean numerical prediction skills relies on the availability of in-situ and remote ocean
observations at the time of the predictions only. Because observations are scarce and discon-
tinuous in time and space, numerical models are often unable to accurately model and predict
real ocean dynamics, leading to a lack of fulﬁllment of a range of services that require reliable
predictions at various temporal and spatial scales. To this end, it is crucial to have sustained and
reliable observations of the parts of the ocean where the predictions are made. The process of
constraining free numerical models with observations is known as data assimilation. The pri-
mary objective is to minimize the misﬁt of model states with the observations while respecting
the rules of physics. Observations assimilated in ocean forecasting systems now include altime-
try, ocean colour, surface velocities, sea ice and data from emerging platforms such as ocean
gliders. Many systems now employ multi-model approaches or ensemble modeling techniques.
A variety of data assimilation are used in operational oceanography and a detailed review of
the data assimilation methods can be found in ( 1). The most common data assimilation method
2
closely parallels the procedures employed in numerical weather prediction ( 2) in which ocean
state estimates are computed sequentially through time, and the resulting estimates updated
when sufﬁcient new observations become available. The caveat of this approach is that mea-
surements are used only once, at the time of the prediction. The information contained in the
history of the measurements and its role in the determinism of the prediction is, therefore, not
accounted for. Consequently, historical measurement cannot be used in real-time forecasting
systems.
Because oceans play a key role in global issues such as climate change, food security, and
human health, effort to create long term repositories with global quality assurance/quality con-
trol standards have received signiﬁcant support over the last decade. These efforts have come
to fruition in the Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) ( 3). GOOS has opened a ﬁeld of
opportunity for new collaborations across regions, communities, and technologies facilitating
enhanced engagement in the global ocean observing enterprise to beneﬁt all nations. In the
United States, these efforts led to the creation of the U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System
(IOOS), which through its eleven Regional Associations implement regional observing sys-
tems covering all U.S. coasts and Great Lakes with activities spanning from head of tide to
the U.S. exclusive economic zone ( 4). Through these efforts comprehensive ocean datasets,
spanning several decades have become available to the research community and novel tech-
nologies rooted in big data science such as Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) have emerged ( 5). The
research presented in this paper provides a novel approach rooted in AI to expand the usability
of observations made before the time of the prediction.
To demonstrate our method, we take advantage of a recent and comprehensive set of obser-
vations in the Gulf of Mexico (GoM), which has received over many decades, and continues to
receive, a lot of attention by oceanographers. The GoM ocean dynamics is controlled by the
pulsating Loop Current, which is the most energetic circulation feature of the basin. Predicting
3
the Loop Current evolution is fundamental to almost all aspects of the GoM, including (a) an-
thropogenic and natural disaster response; (b) the prediction of short-term weather anomalies
and, hurricane intensity and trajectories; (c) national security and safety; and (d) ecosystem
services ( 6, 7). The recent Deep Water Horizon oil spill in 2010 has bolstered a large amount
of research toward improving our understanding and forecasting of the Loop Current System in
hope of mitigating further environmental and ecological damage. Furthermore, because of the
reinforcing interaction between hurricanes, the Loop Current and its eddies, long-term predic-
tion of the Loop Current states is becoming more and more relevant ( 8), (?). Thus, developing
accurate and robust medium-term forecasting models of the Loop Current System and its eddy
formation is imperative and relies on the availability of ocean observations. Improved ocean
observing systems are expected to reduce the uncertainty of ocean/weather forecasting and to
enhance the value of ocean/weather information throughout the Gulf region ( 9).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide an overview
of the concept of data usability temporal expansion. Section 3 describes the numerical models
ﬁelds and the observations used in this study. The usability temporal expansion concept is
applied to both a free and data assimilated simulations. Section 4 introduces the deep learning
model used in this study. Section 5 presents the implementation of the temporal expansion
concepts, which results in the transformation of the ocean models’ velocity ﬁelds beyond the
observation period. Discussion and conclusion follow in Section 6.
Temporal Expansion Model Concept
The rationale behind this concept lies in the fact that ocean observations in the data assimilation
process only serve once, at the time of the forecast, when the background ﬁeld is created. They
are no longer used in forecasts past the time of the observation except in three-dimensional
variational data assimilation where all data collected within a short time window (days) are
4
assimilated as though collected at a single time ( 1). Considering, observations are no longer
relevant after a few days and become history. However, there is a history of the ocean dynamics
captured in the observations that is not part of the constraint provided by the data assimilation
concept. The dynamical history in the observations can be captured with deep learning models
as shown by prediction exercises of the Loop Current dynamics ( 10), (11), (12), (13). Deep
learning allows computational models that are composed of multiple processing layers to learn
representations of data with multiple levels of abstraction. These methods have dramatically
improved the state-of-the-art in speech recognition, visual object recognition, object detection
and many other domains such as drug discovery and genomics. Deep learning discovers in-
tricate structure in large data sets by using the back-propagation algorithm to indicate how a
machine should change its internal parameters that are used to compute the representation in
each layer from the representation in the previous layer ( 14).
Ocean numerical models are mathematical approximations of the laws of physics that are
used to estimate ocean states given a set of boundary conditions and constraints, such as the
atmospheric and the tidal forcing. When not constrained by data assimilation, the simulated
states of the "free-run" are likely to be very different from the the real ocean state, although the
main features of the ocean dynamics will be captured and resolved. These features include the
mesoscale dynamics, the water masses, the eddy kinetic energy, among others, whose variability
and magnitude is likely to be dissimilar to the observed ones, although existent in both natural
and virtual systems. Therefore one can assume that both the simulated and real systems are
on a parallel track although different in many ways. While Deep Learning has been mostly
applied to a single data set for pattern recognition, we show in this study that it can be re-
purposed to learn the differences between the simulated and real systems and their evolution
over time and space. The acquisition of that knowledge between a given ocean numerical model
simulation and a set of observations in the model domain over a time period concurrent to
5
both, enables the prediction of the differences with a Deep Learning model. Therefore, the
knowledge of the differences can be converted into a model ﬁeld observations-based correction
tool, called a Transform Model, just like a data assimilation method, with the advantage of
predicting the correction of the model ﬁeld beyond the period of observation. This methods
also accounts for the common history of the model ﬁelds and measurements in the correction
process. We will show that the improvements to the model ﬁelds, namely the reduction of errors
is signiﬁcant, despite the fact that no physical constraints were applied to the correction. This
correction method evaluation would certainly beneﬁt from a numerical model integration to
enforce the model conservation constraint although they might be different from the ones set by
the measurements. However, testing of the transformed ﬁeld in a numerical model is beyond
the scope of this study.
The concept of the Transform model is depicted in Figure 1. It is based on the availability
of long enough concurrent time series of model ﬁeld and observations. Both are jointly used in
a Deep Learning model that creates a transformation tool of the numerical model ﬁeld based on
the observations. The Transform Model can then be used to correct the numerical model ﬁeld
at any time in the future and in the past, outside of the period of measurements. It thus expands
the usability of the observations beyond the measurement period, both before and after.
Data sets
For the demonstration of our Transform Model we used three data sets that overlap in time,
composed of two numerical models current velocity vector ﬁelds and one set of in-situ current
measurements from an observing array in the GoM. Model’s inherent dynamics may inﬂuence
how effective the Transform Model, which will be shown in Section 5
The ﬁrst numerical model data set was obtained from the HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model
(HYCOM) Consortium. The data was generated by the HYCOM +NCODA Gulf of Mexico
6
1=25Reanalysis (GoMu 0:04/expt_ 50:1), which spans year 1993 to 2012 and has a horizon-
tal resolution of 4:4km. HYCOM +NCODA is a data-assimilative hybrid isopycnal-sigma-
pressure (generalized) coordinate ocean model. The system uses the Navy Coupled Ocean Data
Assimilation (NCODA) system ( 15), (16) for data assimilation. NCODA uses the model fore-
cast as a ﬁrst guess in a three-dimensional variational scheme and assimilates available satellite
altimeter observations (along track obtained via the NA VOCEANO Altimeter Data Fusion Cen-
ter), satellite and in-situ Sea Surface Temperature (SST) as well as available in-situ vertical tem-
perature and salinity proﬁles from XBTs, ARGO ﬂoats and moored buoys. The Modular Data
Assimilation System (MODAS) is used for downward projection of surface information ( 17).
The experiment includes tidal forcing. As noted here, no current vector ﬂow information is used
in the data assimilation process.
The second model’s current vector ﬁelds were obtained from a free-running Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) generalized circulation model simulation of the GoM circula-
tion (MITgcm-GoM), a z-level model. The MITgcm–GoM model was originally developed
for state estimation and prediction of the upper ocean circulation in the GoM, including Loop
Current evolution and eddy shedding. For these purposes, satellite-derived ocean surface ob-
servations and subsurface in situ observations were assimilated using a four-dimensional varia-
tional (4DV AR) method ( 18). For the data set used in this study, however, no data assimilation
is performed. The model uses a telescopic grid with a horizontal resolution of 1/20° × 1/20°
in the central GoM which decreases to 1/10° × 1/10° toward the boundaries and western part
of the domain. For this study, daily output from the simulation for the four years forced by
atmospheric and lateral boundary condition data from 2009 to 2012 are used ( 19). No tidal or
atmospheric pressure forcing is applied.
The in-situ data were obtained from the Dynamics of the Loop Current in U.S. Waters
experiment (hereafter Dynloop), a comprehensive observational study of the Loop Current in
7
the eastern GoM ( 20), (21), (22). The observational array consisted of the instrumentation of
nine tall-moorings and seven short-moorings, and an array of 25 pressure-equipped inverted
echo sounders (PIES). The array system measured the water column velocity for 2.5 years,
beginning in March 2009. Each tall-mooring included water velocity measurements made from
an upward facing 75 kHz ADCP deployed near a depth of 450 m, as well as point current meters
at ﬁve depths from around 600-3000 m, providing high resolution water velocity data between
about 60-440 m depths and much lower resolution water velocity data below this. Additionally,
each short-mooring included a single point current sensor located 100 m above the sea ﬂoor,
providing near bottom water velocity data. The PIES array provided direct measurement of
pressure and acoustic round trip travel times from the sea ﬂoor to the sea surface, which were
used to create vertical proﬁles of density, salinity, and temperature. These pressure records
combined with estimated horizontal density gradients were used to calculate geostrophic water
velocities. This array was located to cover both east and west sides of the Loop Current between
the West Florida Slope and the Mississippi Fan, and was also centered over the zone where Loop
Current eddies typically separate from the Loop Current. The horizontal separation between
moorings was around 50 80km and between the PIES sensors was around 40 50km.
These recorded data were used to construct the measurement-based water velocity matrix used
in this study. More details on the creation of the velocity matrix can be found in ( 12). The
horizontal resolution varies between 30 and 50 km and only the ﬁrst 500 m, corresponding to
26 vertical layers, was used in this study. The time resolution for the velocity data was 12 hours,
which corresponds to 1810 data frames for each u and v velocity component. The ﬁnal matrix
dimensions were of 1810 × 26 × 29 × 36 for each component.
8
Transform Model
The deep learning network of choice for our Transform Model is the u-shaped Convolution
Neural Network (CNN), also known as U-Net ( 23). The typical use of convolutional networks
is on classiﬁcation tasks, where the output to an image is a single class label. However, in
many visual tasks, especially in biomedical image processing, the desired output should include
localization, i.e., a class label is supposed to be assigned to each pixel. The architecture of this
network consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part is the analysis path called the encoder, which is
similar to the CNN architecture widely used for image feature extraction. The second part is
the synthesis path called the decoder, where the compact features are expanded to the input
dimension. In the image case, the feature set, or code, is decoded back to a (segmented) image
of the same dimension as the input image. The name of U-Net is based on the U structure
of the network. This type of network has been widely used in medical image segmentation
applications ( 24, 25 ), for land segmentation studies in remote sensing images ( 26), for cloud
and shadow segmentation ( 27), for modeling and prediction of coastal weather events in the
Netherlands ( 28), and for coastal wetland classiﬁcation ( 29), among many other applications.
For our application, the U-Net is slightly modiﬁed at the output layers to make it suitable for
a regression problem instead of the original structure that was designed for image segmentation.
The problem can be seen as a time series transformation through a regression analysis. Because
the U-Net will learn both the spatial and temporal features of the training data, it is called
hereafter the Spatial Temporal U-Net (STU-Net). Hence, the last layers after the convolution
layers have been replaced by a regression layer, instead of a softmax and a segmentation layer in
the original structure. The ﬁnal model structure consists of four stages of encoders as shown in
Figure 2. The input is made of a four-dimensional input layer, which is organized as x; y; u=v; t .
Here x; yare the coordinates of the sample location, u=v are the zonal/meridional velocities
9
respectively, and tdenotes the time of the measurements.
The implementation of the STU-Net is two-fold (Fig. 3): ﬁrst is the training phase, where
both the numerical model and the observations are fed to the STU-Net. The relationship be-
tween the measurements and the numerical model is represented by the neural network struc-
ture, including its hyper parameters and weights. The errors between the two ﬁelds are used to
adjust the weights of the model until the training process reaches a certain number of epochs.
With a Mini-batch loss set at 0.1 and Mini-batch Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of 0.5, 120
epochs were necessary. The cost function limit used in the training stage was set by the RMSE.
At the end of the training stage, the obtained regression layers constitute the Transform Model
that will be used to correct the numerical model ﬁelds before, during and after observations
started in the second step of the STU-Net implementation, which is the inferring phase. To
apply the transformation back in time, namely before the observation period, training is con-
ducted backward in time to learn the temporal features in reverse order. For the experiments
conducted in this study, the hyperparameters were set to be as follows: InitialLearnRate =
5e 4; MiniBatchSize = 4; MaxEpochs = 300 ; LearnRateDropFactor = 0:1:. This
model was implemented with the Matlab Deep Learning Toolbox.
Implementation of the Transform Model Concept
0.1 Experimental strategy and input data formatting
In this section the strategy to evaluate our Transform Model concept is presented. First we
will assess the transformation of the HYCOM and MITgcm-GoM velocity ﬁelds by the in-situ
observations. The training is conducted with the ﬁrst 855 days and the transformation results
are evaluated with the remaining 50 days of measurements. The purpose of this experiment is to
assess the transformative potential of limited observation periods and its efﬁcacy on assimilated
and non-assimilated numerical model ﬁelds, respectively. Second, the long-term transformation
10
capability of the concept is assessed by using HYCOM as virtual observations to transform the
MITgcm-GoM velocity ﬁelds. In this case, the training took place over a period of three years
and the testing period was either the preceding or following year of the training period.
In order to proceed, both the model and the observations must be interpolated on the same
spatial and temporal grids. Therefore the time interval was set to daily, MITgcm-GoM’s and
the coarsest temporal resolution of the three time series. Because the spatial resolution of the
Dynloop data set over the geographical area of the measurements is 2936,6488for HYCOM
and5270for the MITgcm-GoM simulations, all three data sets were interpolated to 6464
grid using a bicubic interpolation ( 30). Vertically, the same depth layers as in the Dynloop
dataset were used to reinterpolate the other two model ﬁelds, which resulted in 26 layers of
20m interval from the surface to 500m (maximum depth used in this study).
For the short-term Transform Model, the period March 2009 - June 2011 was used for
training and July-August 2011 for testing. For the long-term transformation experiment, the
years 2009-2011 (2012-2010) were used for training and 2012 (2009) for testing in the forward
(backward) experiment.
0.2 Comparison between observed and modeled ﬁelds
To evaluate how different the three concurrent ﬁeld times series are, we calculated the Taylor
diagrams ( 31) of the spatially averaged velocity magnitude for each of them at four depths, 0,
20, 100, and 500m respectively (Figure 4). Because the MITgcm-GoM is a free-run, the model
velocity exhibits at all depths the lowest correlation coefﬁcient (CC), largest RMSE and stan-
dard deviation. While the assimilated HYCOM model exhibits a lower standard deviation than
the MITgcm-GoM, the RMSE between the two models is not signiﬁcantly different at 0, 20 and
100m, except at 500m, where HYCOM underestimates it (Figure 4d). A large RMSE signiﬁes
that the amplitude of the variation of the velocity components is overestimated. HYCOM’s CC
11
is also lower at 500m than at shallower depth, suggesting that the data correction at 500m is less
efﬁcient than in shallower waters.
0.3 Short-term Transform Model evaluation
For this evaluation, two types of experiments were conducted. In the ﬁrst one the transformation
was applied only to the two-dimensional surface velocity and in the second experiment the
transformation was applied to three-dimensional tensor of the velocity ﬁeld. The efﬁcacy of the
transformation was evaluated by calculating the MSE between the transform model solution and
the reference, which is the observations in this case, over the last 50 days of the observational
period, not used in the training phase. The same calculation was done for the original numerical
model velocity ﬁeld.
0.3.1 Two-dimensional ﬁeld transformation
The results of the MSE for both the original numerical model and the transformed model ﬁelds
are shown in Figure 5 for both HYCOM and MITgcm-GoM. Figure 5a shows a signiﬁcant
reduction of the HYCOM model velocity MSE, both in the mean and in the variability. The
MSE of the transformed HYCOM ﬁeld remained almost constant throughout the 50 day period,
unlike the original HYCOM ﬁeld. Figure 5b shows that the transformation of the MITgcm-GoM
ﬁelds was as efﬁcient as for the HYCOM ﬁelds but the MSE of the transformed ﬁelds increased
over time, at a rate similar to the one of the original ﬁelds. HYCOM’s ﬁelds’ MSE, although
quite variable does not exhibit an increasing trend over time like the MITgcm-GoM ﬁelds. This
difference is most likely due to the fact that data were assimilated in the HYCOM simulation
and not in the MITgcm-GoM model. The degree of transformation also called correction gain
is shown in Table 1 and is calculated as follows:
12
Gain =jMtransformed Mmodelj
Mmodel100 (1)
where
(Mmodel =PT
n=1MSE 1(n)
T), (Mtransformed =PT
n=1MSE 2(n)
T) ,Tis the length of the time
series, MSE 1is the MSE between the model and the observed data, and the MSE 2is the MSE
between the transformed and observed data. A high (low) gain signiﬁes that the transformed
model ﬁeld errors are low (high).
The transformation gain was higher for the HYCOM model than for the MITgcm-GoM
ﬁeld. However, the non-assimilated model transformation exhibited a MSE < 1.5 cm:s 1for
up to 30 days, which is the less than the MSE of the assimilated model ﬁelds (Figure 5b). This
result suggests that the correction of the ﬂow ﬁeld with in-situ observations by the Transform
Model can be as effective as if not better than the data assimilation method currently used in the
HYCOM operational forecast. This result is signiﬁcant because the transformation was made
outside of the observation period. In terms of the spatial structure of the ﬂow ﬁeld variability,
the transformation is also able to carry through the spatial modes contained in the observed
ﬁeld as shown in Figure 6. The efﬁcacy of the transformation is stronger for the HYCOM than
for the MITgcm-GoM ﬁeld, which also shows that there is room for improvement in the data
assimilation process, whether in the NCODA system or by applying our Transform Model.
0.3.2 Three-dimensional ﬁeld transformation
Surface observations are in general more commonly available than subsurface observations,
in particular from three-dimensional arrays. Therefore, predicting subsurface dynamics has
remained more challenging than at the ocean surface because of the lack of continuous sampling
at the same location. Vertical projections of the surface corrections is still reliant on methods
described in ( 32), (17). The transformation of three-dimensional ﬁelds is therefore critical to full
13
water column prediction. For the three-dimensional velocity ﬁeld transformation, a Transform
Model was created for each depth level between the numerical model and the observations and
the transformation was applied to the last 50 days not included in the training.
The results in terms of MSE and correlation coefﬁcient (CC) for each depth level for the
transformed HYCOM model over the 50-day period are shown in Figure 7. As seen in the two-
dimensional case, the transformation efﬁcacy is signiﬁcant. The MSE is reduced by a factor
four from the surface down to 200m and by half at the 500m level (Figure 7a). The HYCOM
ﬁeld’s MSE decreases with depth along with the gain of the transformation (Table 1). While the
MSE of the HYCOM meridional velocity ﬁeld is higher than the one of the zonal velocity ﬁeld,
when transformed, the resulting MSEs of each components are nearly identical. Similarly, the
CC of the meridional ﬁeld is much less than the CC of the zonal ﬁeld across all levels (Figure
7b). The difference persists in the transformed ﬁelds but is strongly reduced. In addition the
CC of the transformed ﬁelds is larger than the CC of the original ﬁelds and varies less vertically
as well. The difference between zonal and meridional velocity CC is not surprising since the
current meridional velocities dominate the ﬂow pattern of the Loop Current.
For the MITgcm-GoM three-dimensional transformed velocity ﬁelds the MSE is reduced by
a factor three from the surface down to 200m and by half at the 500m level (Figure 8a) although
that reduction is less for the meridional velocity below 150m. For the CC, the MITgcm-GoM
original model show very small correlation with the observations. The transformed ﬁelds how-
ever, shows an increase for the zonal velocity by a factor sixteen (Figure 8b), relatively constant
over depth, in contrast with the CC of the transformed meridional velocity, which is not as
uniformely improved, although the correction can reach a factor ﬁfteen near 100 and 350m.
The 50-days gain is therefore less for the MITgcm-GoM overall as shown by Table 1 but the
correction factor is much higher for the latter than for HYCOM. The MSE of the transformed
MITgcm-GoM ﬁelds (red lines Figure 8a) is similar to the HYCOM’s original MSE (blue lines
14
in Figure 7a). From a correlation standpoint, there is a similar improvement, in particular for
the zonal velocity (red lines in Figure 8b vs blue lines in Figure 7b) and to a lesser degree for
the meridional velocity. This shows that our method is at least as efﬁcient at correcting the
free-run model with just the observed velocity ﬁeld as the NCODA is with all the different data
sources used for HYCOM. The latter on the other hand requires less correction by the Trans-
form Model, but the improvements by the Transform Model can still be signiﬁcant, especially
near the surface.
Table 1: The average percentile gain of the velocity corrections at different depths by applying
the Transform Model to two data time series at the 50th day of the correction process.
Dataset Zonal Zonal Zonal Meridional Meridional Meridional
Depth 0 m -100m -500m 0 m -100m -500m
HYCOM 78:85% 76:23% 71:78% 74:80% 69:16% 71:99%
MITgcm 54:88% 43:43% 35:53% 48:35% 21:29% 42:91%
While the statistical metrics such as MSE and CC may indicate a good agreement between
the quantities compared, the spatial features that comprise the system may look dissimilar.
Therefore, we show here the efﬁcacy of the transformation in the three-dimensional structures
of the transformed ﬁeld on day 50 after the end of the observation period (Figure 9, 10). For the
HYCOM model, the vertical and horizontal ﬂow features in the observations are present in the
transformed model ﬁeld, showing similarities in magnitude and location in space. The presence
of these features and their timing is critical to the development of the instabilities that lead to the
growth of the frontal cyclones near the surface and then in the deep waters and ultimately to the
separation of a Loop Current eddy ( 21), (22), (33), (34). The three-dimensional transformation
conﬁrms the results seen in the two-dimensional transformation. The Transform Model is ca-
pable of extending the correction of observations in HYCOM at least 50 days past their the last
measurement. For the MITgcm-GoM model, ﬂow ﬁeld difference is quite signiﬁcant as shown
15
by Figure 10. The transformed ﬂow ﬁeld is shifted toward the path of the observed ﬂow, both
horizontally and vertically, although the magnitude of the transformed ﬂow is reduced from the
observations.
0.4 Long-term Transform Model Evaluation
For this evaluation HYCOM is used as virtual observations to transform the MITgcm-GoM
surface velocity ﬁeld. In the forward transformation experiment the transformation was applied
for up to 365 days after the virtual observations ended. As seen in the short-term transformation,
the MSE of the transformed ﬁeld is reduced by up to a factor four and exhibits less temporal
variability than the MITgcm-GoM MSE (Figure 11). The MSE of the transformed ﬁeld varies
over time along with the evolution of the Loop Current System, whose dynamics can affect the
efﬁcacy of the transformation. Indeed between days 120 and 160, the Loop Current evolution
between the HYCOM and the MITgcm-GoM signiﬁcantly diverged. While the eddy shed and
reattached in the HYCOM ﬂow, the Loop Current remained in its extended position in the
MITgcm-GoM model. This event affected the capacity of the Transform Model to correct the
divergent dynamics, which increased the MSE of the transformed model. Nonetheless, the
transformation is able to strongly reduce the MITcgm-GoM velocity ﬁeld MSE even 300 days
after the virtual observation ended, which reveals the long lasting potential of the transformation
process. The transformation is most efﬁcient when the difference between models is associated
with a spatial shift of the ﬂow features (days 200-365 on Figure 11a) and not a dynamical state
difference.
The backward transformation also shows a strong decrease in the MSE of the transformed
MITgcm-GoM velocity ﬁelds for most part except during periods when the original numerical
model MSE is also low. In this case, both MITgcm-GoM and HYCOM circulation features
exhibit dynamical similarities. In addition the transformed MSE is less variable than the original
16
one.
Although the transformation could lead to unrealistic features after several months, the EOF
analysis of the velocity ﬁeld reveals that the modal structure of the virtual observations is present
in the transformed ﬁeld, both in the forward and backward transformations (Figure 12). The
transformation is also able to convey the timeliness of the separation of the Loop Current eddy
(Figure 13) in the forward transformation, which is paramount to the generation of reliable and
useful predictions of the Loop Current. In the backward direction, the Transform Model is
capable of readjusting the Loop Current state in the MITgcm-GoM to closely follow the state
of the Loop Current in the virtual observations (Figure 14).
Conclusions
Reliable and long-term ocean observations are difﬁcult to obtain due to a variety of factors such
as but not limited to costs, data collection manned or unmanned platform availability, instru-
ments failure and durability, accessibility, limited energy supplies, data storage and extraction.
In the current state of environmental predictions, data used for prognostic activities such as
ocean or weather forecast are only used at the time of the forecast. They become part of history
as soon as the forecast is done and are no longer relevant to the forecast. What if we could
extend the period of relevance both forward and backward in time, in other words the usabil-
ity of environmental observations? In this study we have presented a new method based on
deep learning that enables the extension of the usability period of real-world observations up
to one year. We have focused on ocean observations, but we believe that our approach could
be applied to any biogeochemical and physical prediction exercise, as long as observations and
model output are concurrently available.
Our approach is based on the re-purpose of an existing deep learning model, called U-
Net, designed speciﬁcally for image segmentation analysis in the biomedical ﬁeld. We have
17
modiﬁed the network in such a way that its original segmentation layer is replaced by, instead
a regression layer. That layer is used to create a Transform Model that retains the temporal
and spatial evolution of the differences between model and observations to produce a correction
in the form of regression weights that evolves spatially and temporally with the model both
forward and backward in time, beyond the observation period. In classical data-assimilation
problems, the corrections that the observations make to the ﬁrst-guess/background must lie in
the space spanned by P, the error covariance matrix. As such, Phas been the subject of much
research because of the central role it plays in data assimilation ( 1). For example, estimating the
actual level of uncertainty of the ﬁrst-guess is very difﬁcult, and choosing a Pthat accurately
reﬂects the inhomogeneity and anisotropic nature of the errors across the broad range of space-
and time-scales that characterize the ocean is challenging, although innovative methods for
multi-scale data-assimilation are being explored ( 35), (36). In addition there is no efﬁcient
method to spread information forward or backward in time and to evolve the error covariance
matrix in time, which can be attempted by using ensemble-based Khalman ﬁlters methods ( 37).
Even though we haven’t applied our approach to assimilate ocean data in numerical models,
our method could be applied to the estimation of Pwhile solving the time dependency, the
spatial inhomogeneity and anisotropy and at the same time increase the usability of observations
beyond their time measurement for up to maybe one year as shown in this study. It would also
be applicable to the many other challenges faced by data-assimilation, associated with model
and observations errors. The evolving relationship between the best model estimate and the
main causes of errors including model and instrument errors could be captured by a Transform
Model as described in this study without previous knowledge of absent physics or small scale
processes not resolved by the model.
Ultimately, one could envision that the ﬁrst-guess estimate could be entirely realized with
our Transform Model. Our transformation could be applied sequentially, at each time step of
18
the prediction, which would reduce the magnitude of the increments and the shock induced
to the numerical model ( 38), by keeping the model on a track closer to the observations than
when no correction has been applied to the previous step as done in this work. While very
few data-assimilation systems consistently assimilate sub-surface ocean current velocity data,
the results shown in this study also reveal the efﬁcacy of the Transform Model at correcting
the three-dimensional ﬂow ﬁeld, even on existing reanalyzes, such as the HYCOM data used
herein. Finally, with the increased availability of surface current data from high-frequency (HF)
radars, a Transform Model could be easily created for any numerical model with just a few years
of concurrent model data and observations. Such model, which can be updated daily with new
data would provide useful corrections to the model surface ﬂow ﬁeld that would be transferred
vertically to other variables, either by the numerical model itself or through a similar type of AI
technique as the one described here.
References
1. A. M. Moore, et al. ,Frontiers in Marine Science 6(2019).
2. E. Kalnay, Atmospheric modeling, data assimilation and predictability (Cambridge univer-
sity press, 2003).
3. J. Jäger, H. L. Ferguson (1991).
4. J. Snowden, et al. ,Frontiers in Marine Science 6(2019).
5. A. Trice, C. Robbins, N. Philip, M. Rumsey, Ocean Conservancy, Washington D.C. (2021).
6. N. Walker, Geophys. Monogr 195, 103.
7. T. B. Reusch, A. Ehlers, A. Hämmerli, B. Worm, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 102, 2826 (2005).
19
8. B. Jaimes, L. K. Shay, J. K. Brewster, Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans 76, 306
(2016).
9. M. J. Kaiser, A. G. Pulsipher, Marine Policy 28, 469 (2004).
10. J. L. Wang, H. Zhuang, L. M. Chérubin, A. K. Ibrahim, A. Muhamed Ali, Journal of
Geophysical Research: Oceans (2019).
11. J. L. Wang, H. Zhuang, L. Chérubin, A. Muhamed Ali, A. Ibrahim, Forecasting 3, 570
(2021).
12. A. Muhamed Ali, H. Zhuang, J. VanZwieten, A. K. Ibrahim, L. Chérubin, Forecasting 3,
934 (2021).
13. Y . Huang, Y . Tang, H. Zhuang, J. VanZwieten, L. Cherubin, Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence 4(2021).
14. Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, G. Hinton, Nature 521, 436 (2015).
15. J. A. Cummings, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 131, 3583 (2005).
16. J. A. Cummings, O. M. Smedstad, Variational Data Assimilation for the Global Ocean
(Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013), pp. 303–343.
17. D. N. Fox, W. J. Teague, C. N. Barron, M. R. Carnes, C. M. Lee, Journal of Atmospheric
and Oceanic Technology 19, 240 (2002).
18. G. Gopalakrishnan, B. D. Cornuelle, I. Hoteit, Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans
118, 3315 (2013).
19. S. L. Morey, et al. ,Journal of Physical Oceanography 50, 1045 (2020).
20
20. P. Hamilton, A. Lugo-Fernández, J. Sheinbaum, Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans 76,
156 (2016).
21. K. Donohue, et al. ,Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans 76, 174 (2016).
22. K. Donohue, D. Watts, P. Hamilton, R. Leben, M. Kennelly, Dynamics of Atmospheres and
Oceans 76, 195 (2016).
23. O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, International Conference on Medical image computing
and computer-assisted intervention (Springer, 2015), pp. 234–241.
24. N. Siddique, P. Sidike, C. Elkin, V . Devabhaktuni, arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01118 (2020).
25. R. Chacón, P. Neila, M. Salzmann, P. Fua, Proc. 15th IEEE Int. Symp. Biomedical Imaging,
number CONF , Washington, USA (2018).
26. R. Li, et al. ,IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote
Sensing 11, 3954 (2018).
27. L. Jiao, L. Huo, C. Hu, P. Tang, Remote Sensing 12, 2001 (2020).
28. J. G. Fernández, I. A. Abdellaoui, S. Mehrkanoon, arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03303
(2020).
29. K. B. Dang, et al. ,Remote Sensing 12, 3270 (2020).
30. R. Keys, IEEE transactions on acoustics, speech, and signal processing 29, 1153 (1981).
31. J. K. Jolliff, et al. ,Journal of Marine Systems 76, 64 (2009).
32. M. Cooper, K. Haines, Journal of Geophysical Research 101, 1059 (1996).
21
33. L. M. Chérubin, Y . Morel, E. P. Chassignet, Journal of Physical Oceanography 36, 569
(2006).
34. L. M. Chérubin, W. Sturges, E. P. Chassignet, Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans
110(2005).
35. Z. Li, J. C. McWilliams, K. Ide, J. D. Farrara, Monthly Weather Review 143, 3804 (2015).
36. I. Mirouze, E. W. Blockley, D. J. Lea, M. J. Martin, M. J. Bell, Tellus A: Dynamic Meteo-
rology and Oceanography 68, 29744 (2016).
37. P. L. Houtekamer, F. Zhang, Monthly Weather Review 144, 4489 (2016).
38. K. Raghukumar, et al. ,Progress in Oceanography 138, 546 (2015).
Supplementary materials
Figs. S1 to S14
22
Figure 1: Observation usability temporal expansion concept with a Deep Learning approach.
Despite the shorter duration of the observations, the overlapping model ﬁeld can be corrected
beyond the observation period.
Figure 2: The STU-Net structure used in this study for temporal data usability expansion.
23
Figure 3: Implementation of the proposed Transform Model using a STU-Net architecture. The
output layers of the STU-Net, denoted in the ﬁgure by "Transform Model", are used to transform
the numerical model ﬁelds, even when observations are no longer available.
24
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 4: Taylor diagrams of the spatially averaged current velocity magnitude for HYCOM
and MITgcm-GoM and Dynloop (observations) at depths of (a) 0m, (b) 20m, (c) 100m, and (d)
500m.
25
(a) HYCOM model
 (b) MITgcm model
Figure 5: Surface velocity magnitude Mean Squared Errors (MSEs) between the original and
the transformed model for (a) HYCOM model and (b) MITgcm-GoM model
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: First Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) mode of the surface velocity ﬁelds over
the 50-day testing period of the Transform Model. From left to right is shown the observed,
model original, and transformed ﬁeld. (a) HYCOM and (b) MITgcm-GoM.
26
(a) Subsurface MSE
(b) Subsurface CC
Figure 7: Subsurface velocity average mean squared error (MSE - a) and correlation coefﬁcient
(CC - b) between the original and the transformed HYCOM velocity tensor time series.
27
(a) Subsurface MSE
(b) Subsurface CC
Figure 8: Same as Figure 7 but for MITgcm-GoM model.
28
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: Transformed HYCOM three-dimensional velocity structures on day 50 after the end of
the observation period. Both the structures inside (a) and on the boundary (b) of the transformed
volume are shown. The left, middle and right plots show the original HYCOM, the Dynloop,
and the transformed ﬂow ﬁelds.
29
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: Same as Figure 9 but for MITgcm-GoM model
30
(a)
(b)
Figure 11: One year surface velocity time series MSE for the original (blue line) and trans-
formed (red line) MITgcm-GoM in the (a)forward direction and (b) backward direction.
31
(a)
(b)
Figure 12: First Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) mode of the surface velocity ﬁelds over
the ﬁrst (last) 120-day of transformed ﬁeld in the forward (a) and backward (b) direction. From
left to right is shown the observed, the model original, and the transformed ﬁeld.
32
Figure 13: Forward Transform Model - Bi-monthly (rows from February to December 2012)
velocity magnitude of the ﬂow ﬁeld of the virtual observation (HYCOM - ﬁrst column on the
left)), of the MITgcm-GoM (second column), and of the transformed MITgcm-GoM (third
column), respectively. The last two columns show the error ﬁeld of the transformed model
(fourth column) and of the MITgcm-GoM model, respectively.
33
Figure 14: Same as Fig. 13 but for the backward Transform Model.
34
