EQUATION -FREE SURROGATE MODELING OF GEOPHYSICAL
FLOWS AT THE INTERSECTION OF MACHINE LEARNING AND
DATA ASSIMILATION
Suraj Pawar
School of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering,
Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, Oklahoma - 74078, USA.
supawar@okstate.eduOmer San
School of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering,
Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater, Oklahoma - 74078, USA.
osan@okstate.edu
ABSTRACT
There is a growing interest in developing data-driven reduced-order models for atmospheric and
oceanic ﬂows that are trained on data obtained either from high-resolution simulations or satellite
observations. The data-driven models are non-intrusive in nature and offer signiﬁcant computational
savings compared to large-scale numerical models. These low-dimensional models can be utilized to
reduce the computational burden of generating forecasts and estimating model uncertainty without
losing the key information needed for data assimilation to produce accurate state estimates. This
paper aims at exploring an equation-free surrogate modeling approach at the intersection of machine
learning and data assimilation in Earth system modeling. With this objective, we introduce an end-to-
end non-intrusive reduced-order modeling (NIROM) framework equipped with contributions in modal
decomposition, time series prediction, optimal sensor placement, and sequential data assimilation.
Speciﬁcally, we use proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) to identify the dominant structures of
the ﬂow, and a long short-term memory network to model the dynamics of the POD modes. The
NIROM is integrated within the deterministic ensemble Kalman ﬁlter (DEnKF) to incorporate sparse
and noisy observations at optimal sensor locations obtained through QR pivoting. The feasibility and
the beneﬁt of the proposed framework are demonstrated for the NOAA Optimum Interpolation Sea
Surface Temperature (SST) V2 dataset. Our results indicate that the NIROM is stable for long-term
forecasting and can model dynamics of SST with a reasonable level of accuracy. Furthermore, the
prediction accuracy of the NIROM gets improved by almost one order of magnitude by the DEnKF
algorithm. This work provides a way forward toward transitioning these methods to fuse information
from large-scale Earth system models and diverse observations to achieve accurate forecasts.
1 Introduction
The integration of models and observations has greatly transformed the predictions of the Earth system, including
weather forecasts and climate projections [1, 2]. Observations can be either used to estimate the initial condition for
the prediction that is consistent with the present state of the Earth system through the process of data assimilation
or to reduce model errors by advancing the representation of certain processes within a model. Data assimilation
(DA) is a well-established method that involves combining information coming from the forecast model with available
observations and are used extensively in numerical weather prediction (NWP) [3 –5]. DA can also be viewed from the
Bayesian perspective that involves fusing data (observations) with the prior knowledge (i.e., mathematical representation
of physical processes; model output) to obtain an estimate of the distribution of the true state of the process [6, 7].
DA methods are usually classiﬁed into two types, variational approaches and sequential approaches [8]. Variational DA
is formulated as the constrained optimization problem deﬁned by a cost function to minimize the discrepancy between
the prior knowledge (i.e., the computational model) and observations. On the other hand, the sequential DA involves
evolving the state of the system with background information until observations get available, and then updating the
system’s state. One of the key components of the DA cycle is the forecast model. The forecast models used within
DA are based on solving the governing equations or the best approximation of physical processes numerically using
spatial and temporal discretization on a computational grid [9]. Despite their success, the current forecast models havearXiv:2205.13410v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  26 May 2022
difﬁculty representing complex processes like turbulence, convection and clouds [10, 11] leading to high uncertainty
in the prediction [12]. Additionally, the computational cost of ensemble forecasting (using many realizations with
perturbed initial conditions) with numerical models is huge. As a result, the forecast model is one of the major limiting
factors in DA, and this has spurred interest in using data-driven methods for the Earth system modeling that can deliver
both computational efﬁciency and better representation of physical processes derived from data [13, 14].
Data-driven methods have been applied to a wide range of problems in Earth system modeling [15]. For example,
machine learning approaches have been explored for parameterization of subgrid-scale processes [16 –18], precipitation
nowcasting [19], superresolution of wind and solar data [20], and weather forecasting [21]. Some of the studies
with the data-driven weather prediction (DDWP) have already started showing promising results with similar if not
superior performance compared to state-of-the-art NWP models [22 –24]. These DDWP models leverage deep learning
methods like a convolutional neural network, Fourier neural operator, and recurrent neural network that are trained
on data obtained from reanalysis products [25]. Furthermore, data-driven models can be augmented by taking up the
information from physical knowledge, or at least respecting the conservation properties [26 –29]. Some of the work
towards these directions include enforcing the physical laws or statistical constraint into the loss function [30, 31],
tailoring the architecture design to enforce certain symmetry or conservation laws [32 –34], symbolic regression for
equation discovery [35], and end-to-end learning strategy [36].
These studies indicate that ML has the potential to improve scientiﬁc knowledge (and hence models), especially when
we cannot express our understanding in the form of mathematical equations in physics-based models [37,38]. DA could
beneﬁt a lot from ML, where a forecast model is replaced with a hybrid model that incorporates a neural network as a
component of the physical model [39, 40] or as a complete replacement with a data-driven model for forecasting and
state estimation [41, 42]. Another advantage of an ML-based emulator is the quick computation of backpropagation
gradient with automatic differentiation that can be used as a replacement for expensive adjoint solvers within variational
DA [43, 44]. Similarly, some of the challenges with ML such as handling uncertain and sparsely sampled data can be
mitigated with DA. Brajard et al. [45] proposed a two-step process to learn the parameterization of unresolved processes
where a neural network was trained to learn the model error obtained from the analysis state of the truncated model.
Some other works at the intersection of DA and ML include iterative application of neural network and DA to learn
the chaotic dynamics [46], enforcing conservation of mass constraint in DA [47], and for building tangent-linear and
adjoint models of parameterization schemes in variational DA [48].
In this work, we seek to build a data-driven surrogate model trained on the analysis data and integrate it with a sequential
DA cycle. More speciﬁcally, we will focus on a class of data-driven methods that are based on projection-based
reduced-order modeling (ROM). These methods ﬁrst extract the recurrent spatial structures from the high-dimensional
data using singular value decomposition or convolutional autoencoder [49, 50]. The next step is to either solve the
projected governing equations on the dominant modes [51, 52] or learn the projected dynamics with data-driven
methods [53 –55]. The recurrent neural network is one of the most popular algorithms in modeling the dynamics of
lower-dimensional latent space, and has been applied for a wide range of applications [56,57]. One of the advantages of
using projection-based ROM as a surrogate model is that it allows for DA on a reduced-order space rather than on a
full-state and this latent assimilation framework leads to substantial speed improvement in contrast to DA [58 –61]. The
key challenge with latent assimilation is to link the real-time observations in physical space with the latent observation
space [62]. Our approach for latent observation space construction is by ﬁrst identifying the near-optimal sensor
locations using QR pivoting and then using the measurements at these discrete locations for reconstruction on a tailored
basis [63].
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2.1, the surrogate modeling with proper orthogonal decomposition (POD)
for dimensionality reduction, and a long short-term memory (LSTM) network for modeling dynamics is discussed. The
detailed discussion on the deterministic ensemble Kalman ﬁlter (DEnKF) is provided in Section 2.2. The computation
of the latent observation space is described in Section 2.3. In Section 3, the performance of the proposed framework
is demonstrated for the NOAA Optimum Interpolation (OI) Sea Surface Temperature (SST) V2 dataset. Finally,
concluding remarks are provided in Section 4.
2 Methods
In this section, we introduce different components of the proposed framework including surrogate modeling, sequential
data assimilation, and optimal sensor placement strategy. The surrogate model is based on the projection-based model
order reduction which relies on proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) and a recurrent neural network to model the
dynamics of the latent space. This surrogate model is integrated within the sequential data assimilation to correct the
forecast using real-time observations. The latent observation space is obtained by ﬁrst reconstructing the full state from
point sensor measurements and then projecting it onto POD bases.
2
2.1 Surrogate Modeling
Our surrogate model is constructed using the projection-based reduced-order modeling where the high-dimensional
system is ﬁrst compressed to a low-dimensional system and the dynamics of the low-dimensional system is modeled.
The compression is achieved by projecting the high-dimensional data onto a set of optimal linear basis functions
obtained via POD [64, 65]. POD provides the optimal linear basis functions as they minimize the error between the true
data and its projection in the L2sense compared to all other linear basis functions of the same dimension. Given the Ns
snapshots of the data for a state variable x2Rn, we can form the matrix Aas follows
A=
x(1);x(2);:::;x(Ns)
2RnNs; (1)
wherex(k)corresponds to an individual snapshot in time. Then, we perform the reduced singular value decomposition
(SVD) as follows
A=UVT=NsX
k=1kukvT
k; (2)
whereU2RnNsis a matrix with orthonormal columns which corresponds to the left-singular vectors, V2RNsNs
is matrix with orthonormal columns representing the right-singular vectors, and 2RNsNsis a matrix with non-
negative diagonal entries, called singular values, and are arranged such that 12Ns0. For the
dimensionality reduction task, only the ﬁrst Nrcolumns ofUandV(denoted asUandV) are retained along with the
upper-leftNrNrsub-matrix of (denoted as ). The reduced-order approximation of the matrix Acan be written
as follows
A=UVT: (3)
The totalL2error between the snapshot data matrix Aand its reduced-order approximation Asatisﬁes the following
equalities [66]
kA Ak2= inf
B2RnNs
rank(B)NrkA Bk2=Nr+1; (4)
wherekk2is the matrix-2 norm. Equation 4 states that across all possible matrices B2RnNsof rankNror less, the
matrixAprovides the best approximation in the L2sense and the error between Aand itsNr-order approximation A
equalsNr+1. From here on, the Nrcolumns ofUare called as the POD modes or basis functions and we denote them
as=fkgNr
k=1. Once the POD modes are obtained, the compressed latent space for a single state vector xcan be
written as
=Tx; (5)
whereis the reduced-order approximation of the full state vector xand is also referred to as the POD modal
coefﬁcients. The reconstruction of the state vector is then computed as
x==Tx; (6)
wherexis the optimal reconstruction of full state vector x. The number of retained modes, i.e., Nr, is decided based
on the variance of the data captured by the retained modes. The singular values igive a measure of the quality of
information that is retailed in Nr-order approximation of the matrix A. The amount of the energy retained by POD
modes can be calculated using the quantity called the relative information content (RIC) as follows
RIC(Nr) =PNr
j=12
jPNs
j=12
j(7)
The second step of the surrogate modeling is to model the evolution of the latent variables. If the exact equations
governing the physical system are known, intrusive approaches like Galerkin projection can be applied to build the
ROM. The ROM is obtained by substituting the low-rank approximation into the full order model and then taking
the inner product with test basis functions to yield a system of Nrordinary differential equations (ODEs). However,
for geophysical systems, the exact governing equations are unavailable or insufﬁcient for the desired purpose (for
example due to coarse grid resolution). On the other hand, the reasonably accurate and complete observational data for
the evolution of the state of the system has been collected for many decades. This situation makes the equation-free
techniques for predicting the future state of the dynamical system very attractive for multiscale and chaotic dynamical
system modeling [67 –69]. Recently, machine learning methods based on recurrent neural network have been applied
successfully in many studies to build the non-intrusive ROM [56].
3
We apply the long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network to model the evolution of the latent variables. LSTM has
been successfully applied in many studies dealing with modeling high-dimensional spatio-temporal chaotic dynamics
of physical systems [54, 70, 71]. LSTM is a type of recurrent neural network (RNN) that can capture the long-term
dependencies in the evolution of time series data [72]. RNNs contain loops that allow them to persist information from
one time step to another and can be expressed as
h(t)=fh!h(o(t);h(t 1)); (8)
~o(t+1)=fh!o(h(t)); (9)
where h(t)2Rdhis the hidden state at time t,o(t)2Rdhis the input vector at time t,fh!his the hidden to hidden
mapping, and fh!ois the hidden to output mapping. The output of the model is the forecast ~o(t+1)at time stept+ 1.
One of the limitations of RNNs is vanishing (or exploding) gradient to capture the long-term dependencies. This
problem occurs because the gradient is multiplied with the weight matrix repetitively during backpropagation through
time (BPTT) [73]. The LSTM mitigates this issue by employing a memory cell composed of gating mechanism that
decides which information to memorized or forgotten. The equations that implicitly deﬁne the mapping from hidden
state of the previous time step (i.e., h(t 1)) and input vector at the current time step (i.e., o(t)) to the forecast hidden
state (i.e., h(t)) can be written as follows
g(t)
f=(Wf[h(t 1);o(t)] +bf); (10)
g(t)
i=(Wi[h(t 1);o(t)] +bi); (11)
~c(t)=tanh(Wc[h(t 1);o(t)] +bc); (12)
c(t)=g(t)
fc(t 1)+g(t)
i~c(t); (13)
g(t)
o=(Wo[h(t 1);o(t)] +bo); (14)
h(t)=g(t)
otanh(c(t)); (15)
where g(t)
f;g(t)
i;g(t)
o2Rdhare the forget gate, input gate, and output gate, respectively. The o(t)2Rdiis the input
vector at time t,h(t)2Rdhis the hidden state, c(t)2Rdhis the cell state, Wf;Wi;Wc;Wo2Rdh(dh+di)
are the weight matrices, and bf;bi;bc;bo2Rdhare the bias vectors. The symbol denotes the element-wise
multiplication, and is the sigmoid activation function, i.e., (x) = (1=(1 +e x)). The above set of equations are
unfolded in time to model the temporal dependencies in predicting future state o(t+1)given o(t);o(t 1);;o(t l).
Thelis referred to as the lookback window which governs how much amount of the old temporal information is
required to forecast the future state of the system accurately.
When we utilize the LSTM network for constructing a surrogate model, the reduced-order state of the system at a future
time step, i.e., (k+1), is learned as the function of a short history of lpast temporally consecutive reduced-order states
as follows
(k+1)=F((k);(k 1);:::;(k l+1)
|{z}
(k):(k l+1);); (16)
whereF(;)is the nonlinear function parameterized by a set of parameters , andis the low-dimensional
approximation of the full state vector, i.e., the POD modal coefﬁcients given in Eq. 5. Since the surrogate model does
not use any governing equations of the system, it is also referred to as the non-intrusive reduced-order model (NIROM).
2.2 Data Assimilation
We consider the dynamical system whose evolution can be represented as
x(k+1)=Mtk!tk+1(x(k)) +w(k+1); (17)
wherex(k)2Rnis the state of the system at discrete time tk, andMtk!tk+1:Rn!Rnis the nonlinear model
operator that deﬁnes the evolution of the system over the interval [tk;tk+1]. The termw(k+1)denotes the model error
that takes into account any type of uncertainty in the model that can be attributed to boundary conditions, imperfect
models, etc. Let z(k)2Rmbe observations of the state vector obtained from sparse, noisy measurements and can be
written as
z(k+1)=q(x(k+1)) +v(k+1); (18)
4
whereq()is a nonlinear function that maps Rn!Rm, andv(k+1)2Rmis the measurement noise. We assume that
the measurement noise is a white Gaussian noise with zero mean and the covariance matrix R(k+1), i.e.,v(k+1)
N(0;R(k+1)). Additionally, the noise vectors w(k+1)andv(k+1)are assumed to be uncorrelated to each other at all
time steps.
The sequential DA can be considered as a Bayesian inference framework that estimates the state x(k+1)of the system
given the observations up to time tk+1, i.e.,z(1);:::;z(k+1). When we utilize observations to estimate the state of the
system, we say that the data are assimilated into the model, and use the notation bx(k+1)to denote an analyzed state
estimate of the system at time tk+1. When all the observations before (but not including) time tk+1are applied for
estimating the state of the system, then we call it the forecast estimate and denote it as x(k+1)
f. The ensemble Kalman
ﬁlter (EnKF) [74] follows the Monte Carlo estimation method to approximate the covariance matrix in the Kalman ﬁlter
equations [75]. Instead of modeling the exact evolution of a probability density function under nonlinear dynamics,
ensemble methods maintain an empirical approximation to the target distribution in the form of a set of ensemble
memberscX(k)(i)fori= 1:::N . We begin by initializing the state of the system for different ensemble members
cX(0)(i)drawn from the distribution N(bx(0);P(0)), wherebx(0)represents the best-known state estimate at time t0,
andP(0)is the initial covariance error matrix.
The propagation of the state for each ensemble member over the time interval [tk;tk+1]can be written as
X(k+1)
f(i) =Mtk!tk+1(cX(k)(i)) +w(k+1): (19)
The prior state and the covariance matrix are approximated using the sample mean and error covariance matrix P(k+1)
f
as follows
x(k+1)
f=1
NNX
i=1X(k+1)
f(i); (20)
A(k+1)
f(i) =X(k+1)
f(i) x(k+1)
f; (21)
P(k+1)
f=1
N 1NX
i=1A(k+1)
f(i)(A(k+1)
f(i))T; (22)
where the superscript Tdenotes the transpose, and A(k+1)
f(i)is the anomalies between the forecast estimate for the
ith ensemble and the sample mean. Once the observations get available at time tk+1, the forecast state estimate is
assimilated using the Kalman ﬁlter analysis equation as follows
bx(k+1)=x(k+1)
f+K(k+1)[z(k+1) q(x(k+1)
f)]: (23)
Unlike the EnKF algorithm, the DEnKF does not employ any perturbed observations. The Kalman gain matrix is
computed using its square root version (without storing or computing P(k+1)
fexplicitly) as follows
K(k+1)=A(k+1)
f(Q(k+1)A(k+1)
f)T
N 1(Q(k+1)A(k+1)
f)(Q(k+1)A(k+1)
f)T
N 1+R(k+1) 1
;(24)
whereQ2Rmnis the Jacobian of the observation operator (i.e., Qkl=@qk
@xl), and the matrixA(k+1)
f2RnNis
concatenated as follows
A(k+1)
f= [A(k+1)
f(1);A(k+1)
f(2);:::;A(k+1)
f(N)]: (25)
The anomalies for all ensemble members are then updated separately with half the Kalman gain as shown below
bA(k+1)(i) =A(k+1)
f(i) 1
2K(k+1)Q(k+1)A(k+1)
f(i): (26)
The state for all ensemble members is updated by adding ensemble anomalies to analysis state estimate and can be
written as
cX(k+1)(i) =bx(k+1)+bA(k+1)(i); (27)
5
whereis the inﬂation factor to account for modeling errors. Inﬂation and covariance localization approaches are
usually used in the EnKF framework to mitigate small number of ensembles [76 –78]. The above ensembles are used as
initial ensembles for the next assimilation cycle and the procedure is continued.
The DA procedure described so far corresponds to the full state vector of the system. However, in this study, the
forward model is replaced with the surrogate model, and therefore, we perform the data assimilation in the latent
space. The similar ideas have also been used in other studies that deals with the data assimilation for reduced-order
models [43, 59, 61]. Once the LSTM network is trained, it is used to forecast the future state of the POD modal
coefﬁcients in an auto-regressive manner [79]. The evolution of the reduced-order model over the interval [tk;tk+1]
with the LSTM network is given as follows
(k+1)
f=Ftk!tk+1(b(k)); (28)
where(k+1)
fis the low-dimensional forecast estimate of the system, and b(k)is the low-dimensional analyzed state of
the system at time tk. Once the observations at time tk+1gets available, they need to be processed to obtain the latent
observationse(k+1). Usually, the observations are available at very few sparse locations, i.e., m<<n , and therefore,
they need to be mapped from observation-space Rmto state-space Rnthrough some reconstruction technique. Peyron
et al. [61] used the simple interpolation to learn this mapping while applying data assimilation to the indoor air quality
problem. We utilize the POD reconstruction augmented with QR pivoting for learning the map from observations to
full state, and its further details are provided in Section 2.3. The analysis equation in the latent space can be written as
follows
b(k+1)=(k+1)
f+fK(k+1)[e(k+1) q(e(k+1)
f)]: (29)
The Kalman gain matrix in Eq.29 is calculated as follows
fK(k+1)=eA(k+1)
f(eQ(k+1)eA(k+1)
f)T
N 1(eQ(k+1)eA(k+1)
f)(eQ(k+1)eA(k+1)
f)T
N 1+eR(k+1) 1
;(30)
whereeQ2RNrNris the Jacobian of the latent observation operator, and the matrix eA(k+1)
f2RNrNis formed in
latent space similar to Eq.25.
2.3 Reconstruction from Discrete Sensor Locations
As discussed previously, we need to reconstruct the full state of the system from limited number of discrete sensor
locations. The low-rank approximation methods based on POD modes are one of the most popular method for the
reconstruction task, where the sensor data is used to estimate the POD modal coefﬁcients [63, 80]. Additionally, the
QR decomposition with column pivoting is used for the near-optimal sensor placement in contrast to random sensor
placement. We are interested in estimating the full state of the system given the sensor measurements s2Rmat
discrete locations. For this case, we have si=xjfor some 1imand1jn. We can write this as follows
s=x; (31)
where 2Rmnis constructed by taking mrows ofnnidentity matrix. Therefore, each row of the matrix will
consist of all zeros except for the corresponding observation location, where it will have the value of one. We use the
ﬁrstmPOD modes obtained from singular value decomposition of the matrix Agiven in Eq. 1 for the reconstruction
task and is denoted as 	2Rnm(i.e., the ﬁrst mcolumns ofU). The 	is also referred to as the tailored basis
functions in the literature. The approximation of the full state is given by
xex=	a; (32)
where a2Rm. Once the sensor measurements gets available, the POD modal coefﬁcients for the new sample can be
calculated as follows
s	a; (33)
a= (	) 1s: (34)
Once the POD modal coefﬁcients for the new sample is determined, the full state of the system can be reconstructed
using Eq. 32. The latent observations for data assimilation are computed by projecting the reconstructed data onto the
POD basis functions as follows
e=Tex: (35)
6
So far, we did not discuss the choice of the matrix . The choice of the sensor locations can have a signiﬁcant impact
on the accuracy of the full state reconstruction. The sensor locations can be chosen either randomly or based on some
heuristics or intuition of the physical problem. There are several techniques like optimal experimental design [81] and
Bayesian criteria [82] that can be used to determine the optimal sensor locations for moderately sized problems. The
QR factorization is a powerful and robust data-driven method to determine the near-optimal sensor locations solely
based on the data [63, 80]. In this method, we perform the QR decomposition with column pivoting of the matrix 	T.
The QR decomposition calculates a column permutation matrix CT2Rnn, an orthogonal matrix Q2Rmm, and
an upper triangular matrix R2Rmnsuch that 	TCT=QR . The greedy approximation of the optimal sensor
locations is obtained from the ﬁrst mrows of matrix C, i.e., by setting =C, whereCcorresponds to ﬁrst mrows of
the matrix C[63, 83]. We note here that one can also use the QR decomposition method for oversampled case, where
the number of sensor exceeds the number of tailored basis functions used for reconstruction.
3 Results and Discussion
We ﬁrst describe the NOAA Optimum Interpolation (OI) Sea Surface Temperature (SST) V2 dataset used in this study
for building a surrogate model and then integrating it within the data assimilation cycle. Then we present our numerical
experimental results where we analyze the performance of our surrogate model and surrogate model assisted data
assimilation framework.
3.1 Dataset and Preprocessing
We use the NOAA OI SST V2 analysis dataset for building our surrogate model. The analysis uses in situ (ship and
buoy) and satellite SSTs plus SSTs simulated by the sea-ice cover. Before computing the analysis, the satellite data is
adjusted for biases using the method of Reynolds [84] and Reynolds and Marsico [85]. This dataset consists of the
weekly average sea surface temperature on a 1latitude1longitude global grid ( 180360). The SST dataset
exhibits a strong periodic structure due to seasonal ﬂuctuations. Despite this seasonal periodicity, complex ocean
dynamics lead to rich ﬂow physics in this dataset. This dataset has been used in number of recent studies on ﬂow
reconstruction [86], geophysical emulation [87], and dynamic mode decomposition [88]. Here, we use the data from
October 1981 to December 2000 (1000 snapshots) for building a surrogate model and the data from January 2001 to
June 2018 (914 snapshots) for comparing the performance of the surrogate model for forecasting.
3.2 Numerical Experiments
In this subsection, we detail the numerical experiment design to assess the performance of NIROM and the integration
of NIROM with DA, i.e., NIROM-DA. First, we use the data from October 1981 to December 2000 (1000 snapshots)
to identify the POD basis functions. The masking operation is used to remove the data that correspond to the land
area prior to its utilization for surrogate modeling. The temporal mean is also subtracted from the data and the POD is
carried out for the unsteady component of the SST ﬁeld. The ﬁrst four POD modes capture approximately 90% of the
variance of the data and are enough to capture the long-term and seasonal trends in the SST. Therefore, we ﬁx Nr= 4
in this study. The ﬁrst four POD bases computed with POD are shown in Fig. 1. The next step is to train the LSTM
network to learn the dynamics of a reduced-order system and a lookback window of l= 4is used. Once the LSTM
is trained, the model is deployed in auto-regressive manner for dynamical system forecasting. In the auto-regressive
deployment, the initial condition for ltime steps is used to predict the forecast state of the system at (l+ 1) th time step.
Then the state of the system from (2) (l+ 1) is used to determine the forecast state at (l+ 2) th time step. The LSTM
network architecture used in this study employs skip-connection after every hidden layer and is displayed in Fig. 2. The
input and output data for training the LSTM network is scaled between [ 1;1]to accelerate the training. The LSTM
network utilizes three layers of stacked cells, 80 neurons per LSTM cell, and a ReLU activation function. The LSTM
network is trained using an Adam optimizer with the learning rate of 110 3and the weights of the network are
initialized with the random normal initializer. The hyperparameters of the network are determined based on previous
studies [89], and considerations of computational efﬁciency.
Once the surrogate model for SST is built, it is integrated into the DA cycle. The performance of the NIROM-DA
framework is analyzed using a twin experiment for the period of January 2001 to June 2018. This data was not utilized
in any stage of the NIROM construction. This ensures that there is no overlap in the training and online deployment of
the surrogate model. For our twin experiment, the observations are generated by adding noise drawn from the Gaussian
distribution with zero mean and the covariance matrix Rk, i.e.,vkN(0;Rk). We useRk=2
bI, wherebis the
standard deviation of measurement noise and is set at b= 1. The observations are assumed to be collected only at
discrete locations and the sensor locations are determined using the QR pivoting. We utilize only 300 discrete sensors
for the reconstruction and this corresponds to less than 1% of the full state of the system. This number is also very
7
Figure 1: The ﬁrst four leading POD modes extracted from the SST dataset. The temporal mean was subtracted from
the data and the POD modes are computed for he unsteady component of the SST ﬁeld.
close to the optimal rank truncation threshold determined for this dataset from previous studies [63]. The number of
tailored basis functions is also set equal to the number of sensors to avoid the intractable computation associated with
the oversampled case. As discussed in Section 2.3, the tailored basis functions are just the POD modes, and we can
measure the variance of the data captured by these modes using their singular values. The ﬁrst 300 POD modes capture
approximately more than 99.5% of the variance of the data and this leads to the improved reconstruction of small-scale
features. Fig. 3 depicts the near-optimal sensor locations determined through QR pivoting.
Figure 2: LSTM network architectures used for modeling the dynamics of reduced-order dynamical system. The LSTM
is trained to predict the future forecast state of the system based on the previous four consecutive states of the system.
8
Figure 3: Optimal sensor locations for reconstruction obtained using QR. These locations are informative about the
ocean dynamics in contrast to random selection of sensor locations.
The initialization of ensembles is very important for the sequential DA [90]. We experimented with three methods
for initialization of ensembles, the ﬁrst method is using random snapshots collected over some time to initialize the
ensembles, the second one is adding random perturbation to the full state and then projecting it onto POD basis functions,
and the third method is to add a random perturbation to the reduced-order state of the system. The ﬁrst method is not
suitable for our problem because of the seasonality in the dataset and this leads to the phase difference between the
initial condition of ensembles. The second method did not lead to sufﬁcient variability in the initial condition of the
ensembles. The third approach ensures that the initial condition for all ensembles is sufﬁciently different without having
any phase difference. Since we are doing both the forecast and data assimilation in latent space, the approach of adding
a random perturbation to the true latent space is more suitable for our problem. Once all the ensembles are initialized,
the forecasting is started using the NIROM in an auto-regressive manner. The observations are assimilated every third
week to correct the initial condition for the future forecast. As discussed previously, the latent observations are obtained
by ﬁrst reconstructing the full state using the information at discrete sensor locations and tailored basis functions. The
full state is then projected onto POD modes to compute latent observations for assimilation. The number of ensembles
is set at 40 and the inﬂation factor of 1.5 is used to account for model error.
Fig. 4 shows the evolution of POD modal coefﬁcients for the forecasting period, i.e., 2001-2018. The POD modal
coefﬁcients can be interpreted as the contribution of different spatial frequencies (i.e., basis functions) in the evolving
ﬂow. One can observe that the ﬁrst three modal coefﬁcients are responsible for capturing the seasonal dynamics, and
hence do not exhibit strong chaotic behavior. The fourth modal coefﬁcient is signiﬁcantly more chaotic than the ﬁrst
three modal coefﬁcients due to the stochastic nature of small-scale ﬂuctuations. The prediction from the NIROM is
quite accurate in the initial period and the error gradually increases with time. This is a well-known limitation of
the auto-regressive deployment of the LSTM for modeling the evolution of dynamical systems [87, 91] and can be
attributed to the error accumulation over time. The difference is particularly considerable for the ﬁrst modal coefﬁcient
where there is a large phase difference between the true dynamics and predicted dynamics near the ﬁnal time. Similar
errors are also observed for the second and third modal coefﬁcients along with a very inaccurate prediction for the
fourth modal coefﬁcient. The NIROM-DA framework can provide an analysis state that is very close to the true modal
coefﬁcients. The phase difference between the true and analyzed modal coefﬁcients is very small leading to accurate
modeling of seasonal dynamics. The analysis state of the fourth modal coefﬁcient is also very close to the true state,
meaning that the small-scale ﬂuctuations are captured accurately with the NIROM-DA framework.
Next, we analyze the performance of NIROM and NIROM-DA frameworks in the reconstruction of the temperature
ﬁeld. The temperature ﬁeld is reconstructed using the predicted modal coefﬁcients and the POD basis functions with
Eq. 6. We note here that the performance of our surrogate model strategy is limited by the number of POD modes used
and the energy captured by those POD modes. Thus, we can at the most recover the true projection (TP) of the analysis
9
Figure 4: Evolution of the POD modal coefﬁcients for the forecasting (i.e., 2001-2018 period) of the sea surface
temperature data. Predictions are started with an ensemble of 40 noisy observations.
temperature ﬁeld (also referred to as the FOM) onto the POD modes. One can also interpret TP as the ﬁltered version
of the analysis temperature ﬁeld. Thus, for our analysis, the root mean squared error (RMSE) is computed between
the TP temperature ﬁeld and the reconstructed temperature ﬁeld from NIROM and NIROM-DA frameworks. Fig. 5
displays the evolution of RMSE in degrees Celsius for the forecasting period. Overall the RMSE for NIROM-DA is one
order of magnitude less than using only NIROM for the prediction. The probability density of the RMSE for NIROM
and NIROM-DA approaches is displayed in Fig. 6. The RMSE for NIROM lies mostly between 0:5Celsius to 1:5
Celsius, while the RMSE for NIROM-DA is mostly centered around 0:2Celsius. This shows that a pure data-driven
surrogate model can be built by exploiting the observational data collected over many decades and it can provide a
sufﬁcient level of accuracy in forecasting. Furthermore, the prediction from the forecast model can be improved using
online sensor measurement in a computationally efﬁcient manner using latent assimilation.
The quantitative ﬁndings for the NIROM and NIROM-DA frameworks are further supported by the visualization of the
temperature ﬁeld at two different times. Fig. 7 displays the temperature ﬁeld on September 14, 2009 and the temperature
ﬁeld on June 21, 2018 is shown in Fig. 8. As we are retaining only four POD modes for the surrogate model, some
of the small-scale features of the exact temperature ﬁeld (i.e., FOM) are not captured by TP. While these small-scale
features can be captured by retaining a large number of POD modes, training a recurrent neural network to learn the
dynamics of lower-energy POD modes will require additional treatment. One potential solution for this can be the
non-linear proper orthogonal decomposition (NLPOD) where an autoencoder is used to compress a large number of
POD modal coefﬁcients [92]. From Fig. 7, it is seen that even though larger structures in the ﬂow are captured by
NIROM, the error is higher for NIROM compared to NIROM-DA, especially in the northern hemisphere region. Similar
10
Figure 5: The RMSE (in degree Celsius) for the forecast (i.e., 2001-2018 period) between the projection of observed
weekly average SST data onto four POD modes and the forecast obtained from NIROM, and NIROM-DA approaches.
Figure 6: The distribution of the forecast RMSE in degree Celsius for NIROM (left) and NIROM-DA (right).
11
Figure 7: Sample averaged temperature forecasts in degrees Celsius for the week of September 14, 2009. The FOM
corresponds to actual observed averaged sea surface temperature and the TP corresponds to the projection of the FOM
data onto four POD modes. The error for NIROM and NIROM-DA are calculated as the difference between the TP
ﬁeld and the predicted ﬁeld.
observations are also noted in Fig. 8, where the error for NIROM is larger than the NIROM-DA in both the northern
and southern hemisphere regions.
4 Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we propose a novel framework to construct a non-intrusive reduced order model (NIROM) for geophysical
ﬂow emulation and integrate this low-dimensional model within the deterministic ensemble Kalman ﬁlter (DEnKF)
algorithm to assimilate sparse and noisy observations in the latent space. The NIROM is based on a proper-orthogonal
decomposition to identify the dominant modes from the data and then uses a recurrent neural network to learn the
dynamics of low-dimensional latent space. This surrogate modeling strategy exploits the archival of observational data
without relying on any kind of governing equations. One of the critical components of the proposed framework is the
reconstruction of full state form sparse and noisy discrete sensor measurement. This is achieved using the least square
estimation to map the information at near-optimal sensor locations determined through QR pivoting to the full state of
the system. The latent observations for assimilation are generated by projecting this full state onto the POD modes.
We demonstrate the performance of our framework for the NOAA Optimum Interpolation Sea Surface Temperature
(SST) analysis dataset. The NIROM is able to achieve a stable long-range forecast along with predicting larger structures
in the temperature ﬁeld with a sufﬁcient level of accuracy. Once the NIROM is integrated within the DEnKF, the
prediction is improved quantitatively by almost one order of magnitude. The results show that the NIROM can be
readily coupled with the DA and latent space trajectory can be corrected every time sparse and noisy observations get
12
Figure 8: Sample averaged temperature forecasts in degrees Celsius for the week of June 21, 2018. The FOM
corresponds to actual observed averaged sea surface temperature and the TP corresponds to the projection of the FOM
data onto four POD modes. The error for NIROM and NIROM-DA are calculated as the difference between the TP
ﬁeld and the predicted ﬁeld.
available. With this framework, the computational saving is achieved through the replacement of a forward numerical
solver with a data-driven model, and assimilation in latent space in contrast to the full state of the system. The proposed
framework is extremely ﬂexible and other algorithms can be easily accommodated. For example, one can use algorithms
like convolutional autoencoder for dimensionality reduction, or shallow decoder for the reconstruction of full state from
sparse discrete measurements. Furthermore, the NIROM can be easily differentiated with automatic differentiation and
can be utilized in variational DA settings.
Finally, we point out that there is a number of future research directions that one can take. One such future direction is
to improve the performance of the surrogate model by incorporating more modes to capture the low-energy content and
frameworks like non-linear proper orthogonal decomposition [92] can be exploited for that. Another future research
direction is to enhance the robustness of a long short-term memory network by reducing error accumulation during its
auto-regressive deployment [91]. Our future work will also include exploring multi-ﬁdelity data assimilation where a
few ensembles of high-ﬁdelity numerical solvers will be complemented with a large ensemble of data-driven models for
forecasting [93] and employ a shallow decoder for full state reconstruction [94].
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Science, Ofﬁce of Advanced
Scientiﬁc Computing Research under Award Number DE-SC0019290. O.S. gratefully acknowledges their support.
Disclaimer: This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government.
13
Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty,
express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any
information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights.
Reference herein to any speciﬁc commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or
otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States
Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or
reﬂect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.
References
[1]Andrew Gettelman, Alan J Geer, Richard M Forbes, Greg R Carmichael, Graham Feingold, Derek J Posselt,
Graeme L Stephens, Susan C van den Heever, Adam C Varble, and Paquita Zuidema. The future of earth system
prediction: Advances in model-data fusion. Science Advances , 8(14):eabn3488, 2022.
[2]Peter Bauer, Bjorn Stevens, and Wilco Hazeleger. A digital twin of earth for the green transition. Nature Climate
Change , 11(2):80–83, 2021.
[3]Andrew C. Lorenc. The potential of the ensemble kalman ﬁlter for nwp—a comparison with 4d-var. Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , 129(595):3183–3203, 2003.
[4]Florence Rabier. Overview of global data assimilation developments in numerical weather-prediction centres.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , 131(613):3215–3233, 2005.
[5]Ionel M. Navon. Data Assimilation for Numerical Weather Prediction: A Review , pages 21–65. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009.
[6]Christopher K Wikle and L Mark Berliner. A bayesian tutorial for data assimilation. Physica D: Nonlinear
Phenomena , 230(1-2):1–16, 2007.
[7]Eugenia Kalnay. Atmospheric modeling, data assimilation and predictability . Cambridge university press, 2003.
[8]John M Lewis, Sivaramakrishnan Lakshmivarahan, and Sudarshan Dhall. Dynamic data assimilation: a least
squares approach , volume 13. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
[9]Peter Bauer, Alan Thorpe, and Gilbert Brunet. The quiet revolution of numerical weather prediction. Nature ,
525:47–55, 09 2015.
[10] Jun-Ichi Yano, Michał Z. Ziemia ´nski, Mike Cullen, Piet Termonia, Jeanette Onvlee, Lisa Bengtsson, Alberto
Carrassi, Richard Davy, Anna Deluca, Suzanne L. Gray, Víctor Homar, Martin Köhler, Simon Krichak, Silas
Michaelides, Vaughan T. J. Phillips, Pedro M. M. Soares, and Andrzej A. Wyszogrodzki. Scientiﬁc challenges of
convective-scale numerical weather prediction. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society , 99(4):699 – 710,
2018.
[11] David A. Randall, Cecilia M. Bitz, Gokhan Danabasoglu, A. Scott Denning, Peter R. Gent, Andrew Gettelman,
Stephen M. Grifﬁes, Peter Lynch, Hugh Morrison, Robert Pincus, and John Thuburn. 100 years of earth system
model development. Meteorological Monographs , 59:12.1 – 12.66, 2018.
[12] Mark D Zelinka, Timothy A Myers, Daniel T McCoy, Stephen Po-Chedley, Peter M Caldwell, Paulo Ceppi,
Stephen A Klein, and Karl E Taylor. Causes of higher climate sensitivity in cmip6 models. Geophysical Research
Letters , 47(1):e2019GL085782, 2020.
[13] Peter D Dueben and Peter Bauer. Challenges and design choices for global weather and climate models based on
machine learning. Geoscientiﬁc Model Development , 11(10):3999–4009, 2018.
[14] Sid-Ahmed Boukabara, Vladimir Krasnopolsky, Stephen G Penny, Jebb Q Stewart, Amy McGovern, David Hall,
John E Ten Hoeve, Jason Hickey, Hung-Lung Allen Huang, John K Williams, et al. Outlook for exploiting
artiﬁcial intelligence in the earth and environmental sciences. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society ,
102(5):E1016–E1032, 2021.
[15] Markus Reichstein, Gustau Camps-Valls, Bjorn Stevens, Martin Jung, Joachim Denzler, Nuno Carvalhais, et al.
Deep learning and process understanding for data-driven earth system science. Nature , 566(7743):195–204, 2019.
[16] Stephan Rasp, Michael S Pritchard, and Pierre Gentine. Deep learning to represent subgrid processes in climate
models. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115(39):9684–9689, 2018.
[17] David John Gagne, Hannah M Christensen, Aneesh C Subramanian, and Adam H Monahan. Machine learning for
stochastic parameterization: Generative adversarial networks in the Lorenz’96 model. Journal of Advances in
Modeling Earth Systems , 12(3):e2019MS001896, 2020.
14
[18] Thomas Bolton and Laure Zanna. Applications of deep learning to ocean data inference and subgrid parameteriza-
tion. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 11(1):376–399, 2019.
[19] Xingjian Shi, Zhourong Chen, Hao Wang, Dit-Yan Yeung, Wai-Kin Wong, and Wang-chun Woo. Convolutional
lstm network: A machine learning approach for precipitation nowcasting. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 28, 2015.
[20] Karen Stengel, Andrew Glaws, Dylan Hettinger, and Ryan N King. Adversarial super-resolution of climatological
wind and solar data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(29):16805–16815, 2020.
[21] Jonathan A Weyn, Dale R Durran, and Rich Caruana. Can machines learn to predict weather? using deep learning
to predict gridded 500-hpa geopotential height from historical weather data. Journal of Advances in Modeling
Earth Systems , 11(8):2680–2693, 2019.
[22] MG Schultz, Clara Betancourt, Bing Gong, Felix Kleinert, Michael Langguth, LH Leufen, Amirpasha Mozaffari,
and Scarlet Stadtler. Can deep learning beat numerical weather prediction? Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A , 379(2194):20200097, 2021.
[23] Jaideep Pathak, Shashank Subramanian, Peter Harrington, Sanjeev Raja, Ashesh Chattopadhyay, Morteza Mardani,
Thorsten Kurth, David Hall, Zongyi Li, and Kamyar Azizzadenesheli. Fourcastnet: A global data-driven high-
resolution weather model using adaptive fourier neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11214 , 2022.
[24] Stephan Rasp and Nils Thuerey. Data-driven medium-range weather prediction with a resnet pretrained
on climate simulations: A new model for weatherbench. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems ,
13(2):e2020MS002405, 2021.
[25] Stephan Rasp, Peter D Dueben, Sebastian Scher, Jonathan A Weyn, Soukayna Mouatadid, and Nils Thuerey.
Weatherbench: a benchmark data set for data-driven weather forecasting. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth
Systems , 12(11):e2020MS002203, 2020.
[26] K Kashinath, M Mustafa, A Albert, JL Wu, C Jiang, S Esmaeilzadeh, K Azizzadenesheli, R Wang, A Chat-
topadhyay, A Singh, et al. Physics-informed machine learning: case studies for weather and climate modelling.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A , 379(2194):20200093, 2021.
[27] George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang. Physics-
informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics , 3(6):422–440, 2021.
[28] Matthew Chantry, Hannah Christensen, Peter Dueben, and Tim Palmer. Opportunities and challenges for machine
learning in weather and climate modelling: hard, medium and soft ai, 2021.
[29] Christopher Irrgang, Niklas Boers, Maike Sonnewald, Elizabeth A Barnes, Christopher Kadow, Joanna Staneva,
and Jan Saynisch-Wagner. Towards neural earth system modelling by integrating artiﬁcial intelligence in earth
system science. Nature Machine Intelligence , 3(8):667–674, 2021.
[30] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning
framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of
Computational physics , 378:686–707, 2019.
[31] Jin-Long Wu, Karthik Kashinath, Adrian Albert, Dragos Chirila, Heng Xiao, et al. Enforcing statistical constraints
in generative adversarial networks for modeling chaotic dynamical systems. Journal of Computational Physics ,
406:109209, 2020.
[32] Arvind T Mohan, Nicholas Lubbers, Daniel Livescu, and Michael Chertkov. Embedding hard physical constraints
in neural network coarse-graining of 3d turbulence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00021 , 2020.
[33] Tom Beucler, Michael Pritchard, Stephan Rasp, Jordan Ott, Pierre Baldi, and Pierre Gentine. Enforcing analytic
constraints in neural networks emulating physical systems. Physical Review Letters , 126(9):098302, 2021.
[34] Suraj Pawar, Omer San, Adil Rasheed, and Prakash Vedula. Frame invariant neural network closures for Kraichnan
turbulence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02928 , 2022.
[35] Laure Zanna and Thomas Bolton. Data-driven equation discovery of ocean mesoscale closures. Geophysical
Research Letters , 47(17):e2020GL088376, 2020.
[36] Hugo Frezat, Julien Le Sommer, Ronan Fablet, Guillaume Balarac, and Redouane Lguensat. A posteriori learning
for quasi-geostrophic turbulence parametrization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03911 , 2022.
[37] AJ Geer. Learning earth system models from observations: machine learning or data assimilation? Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A , 379(2194):20200089, 2021.
[38] Caterina Buizza, César Quilodrán Casas, Philip Nadler, Julian Mack, Stefano Marrone, Zainab Titus, Clémence
Le Cornec, Evelyn Heylen, Tolga Dur, Luis Baca Ruiz, et al. Data learning: Integrating data assimilation and
machine learning. Journal of Computational Science , 58:101525, 2022.
15
[39] William W Hsieh and Benyang Tang. Applying neural network models to prediction and data analysis in
meteorology and oceanography. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society , 79(9):1855–1870, 1998.
[40] Suraj Pawar and Omer San. Data assimilation empowered neural network parametrizations for subgrid processes
in geophysical ﬂows. Physical Review Fluids , 6(5):050501, 2021.
[41] Ashesh Chattopadhyay, Mustafa Mustafa, Pedram Hassanzadeh, Eviatar Bach, and Karthik Kashinath. Towards
physics-inspired data-driven weather forecasting: integrating data assimilation with a deep spatial-transformer-
based u-net in a case study with era5. Geoscientiﬁc Model Development , 15(5):2221–2237, 2022.
[42] Stephen G Penny, Timothy A Smith, T-C Chen, Jason A Platt, H-Y Lin, Michael Goodliff, and Henry DI Abarbanel.
Integrating recurrent neural networks with data assimilation for scalable data-driven state estimation. Journal of
Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , 14(3):e2021MS002843, 2022.
[43] Romit Maulik, Vishwas Rao, Jiali Wang, Gianmarco Mengaldo, Emil Constantinescu, Bethany Lusch, Prasanna
Balaprakash, Ian Foster, and Rao Kotamarthi. Aieada 1.0: Efﬁcient high-dimensional variational data assimilation
with machine-learned reduced-order models. Geoscientiﬁc Model Development Discussions , pages 1–20, 2022.
[44] Austin Chennault, Andrey A Popov, Amit N Subrahmanya, Rachel Cooper, Anuj Karpatne, and Adrian Sandu.
Adjoint-matching neural network surrogates for fast 4d-var data assimilation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08626 ,
2021.
[45] Julien Brajard, Alberto Carrassi, Marc Bocquet, and Laurent Bertino. Combining data assimilation and ma-
chine learning to infer unresolved scale parametrization. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A ,
379(2194):20200086, 2021.
[46] Julien Brajard, Alberto Carrassi, Marc Bocquet, and Laurent Bertino. Combining data assimilation and machine
learning to emulate a dynamical model from sparse and noisy observations: A case study with the lorenz 96 model.
Journal of Computational Science , 44:101171, 2020.
[47] Yvonne Ruckstuhl, Tijana Janji ´c, and Stephan Rasp. Training a convolutional neural network to conserve mass in
data assimilation. Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics , 28(1):111–119, 2021.
[48] Sam Hatﬁeld, Matthew Chantry, Peter Dueben, Philippe Lopez, Alan Geer, and Tim Palmer. Building tangent-
linear and adjoint models for data assimilation with neural networks. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth
Systems , 13(9):e2021MS002521, 2021.
[49] Steven L Brunton, Bernd R Noack, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Machine learning for ﬂuid mechanics. Annual
Review of Fluid Mechanics , 52:477–508, 2020.
[50] Changhong Mou, Zhu Wang, David R Wells, Xuping Xie, and Traian Iliescu. Reduced order models for the
quasi-geostrophic equations: A brief survey. Fluids , 6(1):16, 2020.
[51] Omer San and Traian Iliescu. A stabilized proper orthogonal decomposition reduced-order model for large scale
quasigeostrophic ocean circulation. Advances in Computational Mathematics , 41(5):1289–1319, 2015.
[52] Kevin Carlberg, Charbel Bou-Mosleh, and Charbel Farhat. Efﬁcient non-linear model reduction via a least-squares
petrov–galerkin projection and compressive tensor approximations. International Journal for numerical methods
in engineering , 86(2):155–181, 2011.
[53] Zheng Wang, Dunhui Xiao, Fangxin Fang, Rajesh Govindan, Christopher C Pain, and Yike Guo. Model
identiﬁcation of reduced order ﬂuid dynamics systems using deep learning. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Fluids , 86(4):255–268, 2018.
[54] Sk M Rahman, Suraj Pawar, Omer San, Adil Rasheed, and Traian Iliescu. Nonintrusive reduced order modeling
framework for quasigeostrophic turbulence. Physical Review E , 100(5):053306, 2019.
[55] Shaowu Pan and Karthik Duraisamy. Long-time predictive modeling of nonlinear dynamical systems using neural
networks. Complexity , 2018, 2018.
[56] Jian Yu, Chao Yan, and Mengwu Guo. Non-intrusive reduced-order modeling for ﬂuid problems: A brief
review. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part G: Journal of Aerospace Engineering ,
233(16):5896–5912, 2019.
[57] Shady E Ahmed, Suraj Pawar, Omer San, Adil Rasheed, Traian Iliescu, and Bernd R Noack. On closures for
reduced order models—a spectrum of ﬁrst-principle to machine-learned avenues. Physics of Fluids , 33(9):091301,
2021.
[58] César Andres Quilodrán Casas. Fast ocean data assimilation and forecasting using a neural-network reduced-space
regional ocean model of the north brazil current. 2018.
16
[59] Maddalena Amendola, Rossella Arcucci, Laetitia Mottet, Cesar Quilodran Casas, Shiwei Fan, Christopher
Pain, Paul Linden, and Yi-Ke Guo. Data assimilation in the latent space of a neural network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.12056 , 2020.
[60] C Liu, R Fu, D Xiao, R Stefanescu, P Sharma, C Zhu, S Sun, and C Wang. Enkf data-driven reduced order
assimilation system. Engineering Analysis with Boundary Elements , 139:46–55, 2022.
[61] Mathis Peyron, Anthony Fillion, Selime Gürol, Victor Marchais, Serge Gratton, Pierre Boudier, and Gael Goret.
Latent space data assimilation by using deep learning. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society ,
147(740):3759–3777, 2021.
[62] Sibo Cheng, Jianhua Chen, Charitos Anastasiou, Panagiota Angeli, Omar K Matar, Yi-Ke Guo, Christopher C Pain,
and Rossella Arcucci. Generalised latent assimilation in heterogeneous reduced spaces with machine learning
surrogate models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03497 , 2022.
[63] Krithika Manohar, Bingni W Brunton, J Nathan Kutz, and Steven L Brunton. Data-driven sparse sensor placement
for reconstruction: Demonstrating the beneﬁts of exploiting known patterns. IEEE Control Systems Magazine ,
38(3):63–86, 2018.
[64] Lawrence Sirovich. Turbulence and the dynamics of coherent structures. i. coherent structures. Quarterly of
Applied Mathematics , 45(3):561–571, 1987.
[65] Gal Berkooz, Philip Holmes, and John L Lumley. The proper orthogonal decomposition in the analysis of turbulent
ﬂows. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics , 25(1):539–575, 1993.
[66] Lloyd N Trefethen and David Bau III. Numerical linear algebra , volume 50. Siam, 1997.
[67] Ioannis G Kevrekidis and Giovanni Samaey. Equation-free multiscale computation: Algorithms and applications.
Annual review of physical chemistry , 60:321–344, 2009.
[68] Pantelis R Vlachas, Wonmin Byeon, Zhong Y Wan, Themistoklis P Sapsis, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Data-driven
forecasting of high-dimensional chaotic systems with long short-term memory networks. Proceedings of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , 474(2213):20170844, 2018.
[69] Jaideep Pathak, Brian Hunt, Michelle Girvan, Zhixin Lu, and Edward Ott. Model-free prediction of large spatiotem-
porally chaotic systems from data: A reservoir computing approach. Physical Review Letters , 120(2):024102,
2018.
[70] Arvind T Mohan and Datta V Gaitonde. A deep learning based approach to reduced order modeling for turbulent
ﬂow control using lstm neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09269 , 2018.
[71] Pantelis R Vlachas, Jaideep Pathak, Brian R Hunt, Themistoklis P Sapsis, Michelle Girvan, Edward Ott, and
Petros Koumoutsakos. Backpropagation algorithms and reservoir computing in recurrent neural networks for the
forecasting of complex spatiotemporal dynamics. Neural Networks , 2020.
[72] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
[73] Paul J Werbos. Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do it. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
78(10):1550–1560, 1990.
[74] Gerrit Burgers, Peter Jan van Leeuwen, and Geir Evensen. Analysis scheme in the ensemble Kalman ﬁlter.
Monthly Weather Review , 126(6):1719–1724, 1998.
[75] Rudolph Emil Kalman. A new approach to linear ﬁltering and prediction problems. Journal of Basic Engineering ,
82(1):35–45, 03 1960.
[76] Peter L Houtekamer and Herschel L Mitchell. Ensemble Kalman ﬁltering. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and physical oceanography ,
131(613):3269–3289, 2005.
[77] Ahmed Attia and Adrian Sandu. Dates: a highly extensible data assimilation testing suite v1. 0. Geoscientiﬁc
Model Development , 12(2):629–649, 2019.
[78] Shady E Ahmed, Suraj Pawar, and Omer San. PyDA: A Hands-On Introduction to Dynamical Data Assimilation
with Python. Fluids , 5(4):225, 2020.
[79] Suraj Pawar, Omer San, Adil Rasheed, and Ionel M Navon. A nonintrusive hybrid neural-physics modeling of
incomplete dynamical systems: Lorenz equations. GEM-International Journal on Geomathematics , 12(1):1–31,
2021.
[80] Zlatko Drmac and Serkan Gugercin. A new selection operator for the discrete empirical interpolation method—
improved a priori error bound and extensions. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing , 38(2):A631–A648, 2016.
17
[81] Siddharth Joshi and Stephen Boyd. Sensor selection via convex optimization. IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing , 57(2):451–462, 2008.
[82] Andreas Krause, Ajit Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Near-optimal sensor placements in gaussian processes: Theory,
efﬁcient algorithms and empirical studies. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9(2), 2008.
[83] Jan Williams, Olivia Zahn, and J Nathan Kutz. Data-driven sensor placement with shallow decoder networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05330 , 2022.
[84] Richard W Reynolds. A real-time global sea surface temperature analysis. Journal of climate , 1(1):75–87, 1988.
[85] Richard W Reynolds and Diane C Marsico. An improved real-time global sea surface temperature analysis.
Journal of climate , 6(1):114–119, 1993.
[86] Jared L Callaham, Kazuki Maeda, and Steven L Brunton. Robust ﬂow reconstruction from limited measurements
via sparse representation. Physical Review Fluids , 4(10):103907, 2019.
[87] Romit Maulik, Romain Egele, Bethany Lusch, and Prasanna Balaprakash. Recurrent neural network architec-
ture search for geophysical emulation. In SC20: International Conference for High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 1–14. IEEE, 2020.
[88] J Nathan Kutz, Xing Fu, and Steven L Brunton. Multiresolution dynamic mode decomposition. SIAM Journal on
Applied Dynamical Systems , 15(2):713–735, 2016.
[89] Suraj Pawar, Omer San, and Gary G Yen. Hyperparameter search using the genetic algorithm for surrogate
modeling of geophysical ﬂows. In AIAA SCITECH 2022 Forum , page 0459, 2022.
[90] Peter L Houtekamer and Fuqing Zhang. Review of the ensemble Kalman ﬁlter for atmospheric data assimilation.
Monthly Weather Review , 144(12):4489–4532, 2016.
[91] Matteo Sangiorgio and Fabio Dercole. Robustness of LSTM neural networks for multi-step forecasting of chaotic
time series. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals , 139:110045, 2020.
[92] Shady E Ahmed, Omer San, Adil Rasheed, and Traian Iliescu. Nonlinear proper orthogonal decomposition for
convection-dominated ﬂows. Physics of Fluids , 33(12):121702, 2021.
[93] Andrey A Popov, Changhong Mou, Adrian Sandu, and Traian Iliescu. A multiﬁdelity ensemble kalman ﬁlter with
reduced order control variates. SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing , 43(2):A1134–A1162, 2021.
[94] N Benjamin Erichson, Lionel Mathelin, Zhewei Yao, Steven L Brunton, Michael W Mahoney, and J Nathan Kutz.
Shallow neural networks for ﬂuid ﬂow reconstruction with limited sensors. Proceedings of the Royal Society A ,
476(2238):20200097, 2020.
18
