arXiv:2009.01554v1  [cs.SE]  3 Sep 2020Automated identiﬁcation of metamorphic test scenarios for an
ocean-modeling application
Dilip J. Hiremath∗†, Martin Claus∗†, Wilhelm Hasselbring†and Willi Rath∗
∗GEOMAR, Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research, Kiel, Germany
†Kiel University, Software Engineering Group, Kiel, German y
Abstract —Metamorphic testing seeks to validate software in
the absence of test oracles. Our application domain is ocean
modeling, where test oracles often do not exist, but where
symmetries of the simulated physical systems are known. In
this short paper we present work in progress for automated
generation of metamorphic test scenarios using machine lea rning.
Metamorphic testing may be expressed as f(g(X))=h(f(X)) wi th
f being the application under test, with input data X, and
with the metamorphic relation (g, h). Automatically genera ted
metamorphic relations can be used for constructing regress ion
tests, and for comparing different versions of the same soft ware
application.
Here, we restrict to h being the identity map. Then, the task
of constructing tests means ﬁnding different g which we tack le
using machine learning algorithms. These algorithms typic ally
minimize a cost function. As one possible g is already known t o
be the identity map, for ﬁnding a second possible g, we constr uct
the cost function to minimize for g being a metamorphic relat ion
and to penalize for g being the identity map. After identifyi ng
the ﬁrst metamorphic relation, the procedure is repeated wi th
a cost function rewarding g that are orthogonal to previousl y
found metamorphic relations.
For experimental evaluation, two implementations of an oce an-
modeling application will be subjected to the proposed meth od
with the objective of presenting the use of metamorphic rela tions
to test the implementations of the applications.
Keywords -Metamorphic testing, Ocean-modeling application
testing, Oracle problem, Metamorphic relation, Test case g en-
eration, Software testing
I. M OTIVATION
Ocean-modeling applications often build on legacy codes
that usually do not feature any systematic approach to softw are
testing [1]. Establishing tests for such complex systems is
a challenge that is complicated further by the fact that the
exploratory nature of scientiﬁc software often makes it im-
possible to have test oracles for speciﬁc results. Alternat ively,
symmetries of the physical system that is modeled can be used
to formulate necessary conditions to check for the correctn ess
of the software. These correctness measure will not be based
on results, but on the software’s behaviour under changes to
the input data.
Metamorphic testing is an approach to the generation of
test cases and the veriﬁcation of test results. The central
element of Metamorphic testing is a set of metamorphic
relations. Metamorphic relations are necessary propertie s of
the target application in relation to multiple inputs and th eir
corresponding outputs [2]. We intend to use machine learnin g
for identifying metamorphic relations and derive metamorp hic
tests to validate the ocean system models [3]. Here, weuse a simple but realistic Ocean-modelling application to
demonstrate our approach.
Once identiﬁed, metamorphic relations can not only be
used to construct regression tests for software that is unde r
development but also for validating different implementat ions
of the same software. Further, since the underlying physica l
symmetries are constant, metamorphic relations identiﬁed in
one ocean-modeling application might be transferred to oth er
applications representing the same physical system.
In Section II, we formulate the problem to be solved,
before introducing the example application in Section III. In
Section IV, we restrict the problem to ﬁnding metamorphic
relations that are afﬁne transformations for which we sketc h
solutions employing machine learning in Section V. Section VI
concludes the paper with an outlook to future work.
II. F ORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM
Metamorphic testing may be written as
f(g(X)) =h(f(X)) (1)
withXdenoting all input data to the application under test
fand with the pair of functions (g,h)as the metamorphic
relation, we seek. As an initial step, we assume hto be
the identity map and we are left with ﬁnding g, or at least
approximations to g. Here we propose to use machine learning
algorithms for ﬁnding possible g. These algorithms typically
minimize a cost function. Assuming we start from a known set
of metamorphic relations {g0,g1,...,g n−1}, we select a cost
function that rewards gnwhich minimizes |f(gn(X))−f(X)|
and penalizes if gnis already known:
cost(gn,{g0,...,g n−1},X) =|f(gn(X))−f(X)|/producttextn−1
i=0|gn(X)−gi(X)|2
(2)
We start the iteration with g0being the identity map and deﬁne
the norm |X|to be the square root of the sum of the squares
of the atomic data points X.
III. E XAMPLE APPLICATION
We provide an example application as an artifact [4] that can
be directly used on Binder [5]. This example shows how to use
metamorphic relations derived from the equations describi ng
the applications to uncover bugs in the implementation.
As an example application, we will use the calculation of a
time series of the kinetic energy of the surface ocean
e(t,y,x) =1
2/integraltextdydx(u(t,y,x)2+v(t,y,x)2)/integraltext
dydx(3)
wheretindicates time, yandxare spatial coordinates, and
horizontal surface-velocities uandvare calculated from sea-
levelsshusing
(u,v)(t,y,x) =G
F/parenleftbigg
−∂
∂y,∂
∂x/parenrightbigg
ssh(t,y,x) (4)
The coordinate system is chosen to have a cyclic boundary
condition in both yandxand there are the physical constants
GandF. From Equations (3) and (4), it is straightforward
to ﬁnd metamorphic relations based on symmetries of the
physical system. Among these symmetries are sign changes
of any of ssh,y,x,G, orF, scaling of GandFthat does
not change the ratio G/F , or linear transformations of the
coordinate system that leave nearest-neighbor relations i ntact
(transposition, translation).
In our example application, there are two implementations
of Equation (3) one of which is not respecting cyclic boundar y
condition. The two implementations can be found in the
artifact [4].
To numerically implement Equation (3), we discretize the
integral in (3) and the partial derivatives in (4) by applyin g the
method of ﬁnite differences. Linking back to Equation (1), t he
input data Xcontain all discretized values of sea level ssh,
of all coordinates t,y,x, and the physical constants GandF.
A metamorphic transformation g(x)would change all or part
of the atomic data points in Xsuch that all e(g(X)) =e(X)
for all discrete values of time t.
IV. M ETAMORPHIC RELATIONS AS AFFINE
TRANSFORMATIONS
We propose to formulate the metamorphic relation gas an
afﬁne transformation relating all the atomic data points in X
to all the atomic data points in g(X)
X′=g(X) (5)
with
X′
k=/summationdisplay
mαk,mXm+βk (6)
where the αk,mrepresents a linear mapping from Xandβk
add arbitrary offsets to the atomic data points. Identiﬁyin g
metamorphic relations then amounts to ﬁnding αk,mandβk
such that the cost function (2) becomes zero for arbitrary in put
dataX.
V. S OLUTION EXPLORATION
Existing machine learning methods are explored to solve
Equation (6) optimized for the cost function (2). A modiﬁed
algorithm loosely based on genetic algorithms with Monte
Carlo optimization can be explored. The initial values for
{α,β}are chosen randomly and in each step a mutation
δ{α,β}is proposed. Probability of acceptance of the mutation
(p) is speciﬁed and iterative mutations applied to solve for the
deﬁned cost function (2). On converging to a local minimum,
{α,β}values are recorded and randomly reset to identify other
solutions for equation (6).VI. C HALLENGES AND FUTURE WORK
The challenge with these methods would be to explain the
metamorphic relations in terms of physical symmetries that
hold in the real Ocean. Nonetheless, we believe that even
metamorphic relations which do not reﬂect symmetries of the
physical system can still be used to construct regression te sts.
Further work is to relax the restriction to h(1) being
the identity map and to allow for gnot being an afﬁne
transformation. This, however, would generalize gandhto
be any non-linear map of the atomic data points which would
be challenging to formalize.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Johanson and W. Hasselbring, “Software Engineering f or Com-
putational Science: Past, Present, Future,” Computing in Science and
Engineering , pp. 1–31, 2018.
[2] T. Y . Chen, F.-C. Kuo, H. Liu, P.-L. Poon, D. Towey, T. H. Ts e,
and Z. Q. Zhou, “Metamorphic Testing: A Review of Challenges and
Opportunities,” ACM Computing Surveys , 2018.
[3] U. Kanewala and J. M. Bieman, “Using machine learning tec hniques to
detect metamorphic relations for programs without test ora cles,” 2013
IEEE 24th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering,
ISSRE 2013 , pp. 1–10, 2013.
[4] W. Rath, “Artifacts for: Automated generation of metamo rphic test
scenarios for an ocean-modeling application,” 12 2019. [On line].
Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3566954
[5] Project Jupyter, M. Bussonnier, J. Forde, J. Freeman, B. Granger, T. Head,
C. Holdgraf, K. Kelley, G. Nalvarte, A. Osheroff, M. Pacer, Y . Panda,
F. Perez, B. Ragan-Kelley, and C. Willing, “Binder 2.0 - Repr oducible, In-
teractive, Sharable Environments for Science at Scale.” 10 .25080/Majora-
4af1f417-011, Tech. Rep., 2018.
