manuscript submitted to JGR
Deep learning in the abyss: a stratified Physics
Informed Neural Network for data assimilation
Vadim Limousin1, Nelly Pustelnik1, Bruno Deremble2and Antoine Venaille1.
1CNRS, ENS de Lyon, LPENSL, UMR5672, 69342, Lyon cedex 07, France
2Universit´ e Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, INRAE, IRD, Grenoble-INP, Institut des G´ eosciences de
l’Environnement, Grenoble, France
Key Points:
•We propose a multi-layer Physics Informed Neural Networks suited for deep flow
reconstruction.
•We demonstrate the potential of this method for data assimilation using SWOT-
like and ARGO-like pseudo-observations in a three-layer quasi-geostrophic model.
Corresponding author: Antoine Venaille, antoine.venaille@ens-lyon.fr
Corresponding author: Nelly Pustelnik, nelly.pustelnik@ens-lyon.fr
–1–arXiv:2503.19160v1  [physics.ao-ph]  24 Mar 2025
manuscript submitted to JGR
Abstract
The reconstruction of deep ocean currents is a major challenge in data assimilation due to
the scarcity of interior data. In this work, we present a proof of concept for deep ocean
flow reconstruction using a Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN), a machine learning
approach that offers an alternative to traditional data assimilation methods. We introduce
an efficient algorithm called StrAss-PINN (for Stratified Assimilation PINNs), which assigns
a separate network to each layer of the ocean model while allowing them to interact during
training. The neural network takes spatiotemporal coordinates as input and predicts the
velocity field at those points. Using a SIREN architecture (a multilayer perceptron with
sine activation functions), which has proven effective in various contexts, the network is
trained using both available observational data and dynamical priors enforced at several
collocation points. We apply this method to pseudo-observed ocean data generated from
a 3-layer quasi-geostrophic model, where the pseudo-observations include surface-level data
akin to SWOT observations of sea surface height, interior data similar to ARGO floats,
and a limited number of deep ARGO-like measurements in the lower layers. Our approach
successfully reconstructs ocean flows in both the interior and surface layers, demonstrating
a strong ability to resolve key ocean mesoscale features, including vortex rings, eastward jets
associated with potential vorticity fronts, and smoother Rossby waves. This work serves as
a prelude to applying StrAss-PINN to real-world observational data.
Plain Language Summary
Although bottom ocean currents are crucial for understanding overall ocean circulation,
observations in the depths are limited, relying mainly on a few temperature, salinity, and
pressure measurements. In contrast, the ocean’s surface is monitored in high detail by satel-
lites. This article proposes using both the dynamical equations that describe vertical flow
structure and advanced machine learning methods to reconstruct the full ocean dynamics.
Since surface and bottom ocean dynamics are correlated, combining physical constraints
with statistical analysis can help infer the entire system’s dynamics. This approach, called
Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs), integrates physics and statistical tools into a
unified learning architecture.
1 Introduction
While satellites provide a vast amount of data on surface ocean currents (Fu et al.,
1994; Fu et al, 2024), the interior remains sparsely observed, due to extreme conditions.
Instruments such as localized moorings, ARGO floats (Wong et al., 2020), and acoustic
measurements (Munk et al., 1995) offer valuable insights into deep layers, but reconstructing
deep ocean dynamics from such limited data remains a major challenge. Reconstructing deep
ocean currents is of tremendous importance, as deep flows play a central role in heat storage,
carbon sequestration, and the oceanic energy budget (Fox-Kemper et al., 2021).
From a methodological point of view, the uneven distribution of data makes this inverse
problem particularly difficult. Traditionally, this issue has been addressed using either
statistical methods, e.g. (Guinehut et al., 2012), which are agnostic to the underlying flow
model, or data assimilation techniques, which combine available data with a flow model to
provide reanalysis (Blayo et al., 2014; Carrassi et al., 2018). Over the past decade, there
has been a growing shift toward machine learning techniques (Sonnewald et al., 2021). In
this paper, we focus on one of these methods — Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs)
(Karniadakis et al., 2021) — which can be considered as a machine learning counterpart to
data assimilation. A key advantage of this approach is that the field to recover is encoded
directly in the neural network, eliminating the need for a grid-based discretization of the
field. However, a major challenge remains to train the network to reconstruct multiscale,
chaotic flows — characteristics that are prevalent in ocean dynamics. Here, we develop a
multilayer PINNs learning strategy called StrAss-PINN , for Stratified Assimilation PINNs.
–2–
manuscript submitted to JGR
We demonstrate its feasibility and utility for deep flow reconstruction. This is achieved in
the presence of surface-intensified data and sparse subsurface data.
State-of-the-art on surface fields recovery – A large body of studies have been focused
on reconstructing surface and subsurface fields from these data. For instance, regarding sea
surface height (SSH) fields obtained from satellite altimeters, existing gridded datasets are
produced using optimal interpolation (Ballarotta et al., 2019). Spatial resolution of the
reconstructions can be improved using simple assimilation methods, such as nudging with
simple and fast dynamical models (Le Guillou et al., 2021), or deep learning strategies with
convolutional networks (Manucharyan et al., 2021). More recently, powerful data-driven
techniques such as 4DVarNet have replaced the dynamical constraints in the assimilation
variational problems with a penalty term involving a neural network in order to learn the
dynamic from data themselves (Beauchamp et al., 2023). Other data-driven methods, de-
compositions into empirical orthogonal functions or autoencoders (Barth et al., 2020), have
been used to reconstruct sea surface temperature (SST) fields in the presence of clouds that
leads to spatio temporal gaps in the data set. Learning efficient interpolation from both SST
and SSH has also been addressed within various machine learning frameworks, e.g. (Martin
et al., 2023; Fablet et al., 2024; Archambault et al., 2024).
Towards the recovery of deep ocean – The common feature of all the techniques men-
tioned above is the reconstruction of a 2d+t field. Data-driven methods have also been
developed for 3d+t fields, provided there is sufficient data for at least some period of time.
For example, Guinehut et al. (2012) used optimal interpolation and multilinear regression
on climatological data to infer the vertical structure of mesoscale turbulence from observa-
tions alone. Similarly, Oulhen et al. (2024) combined data reduction techniques based on
Empirical Orthogonal Functions (EOF) and analogs to reconstruct 3d+t temperature fields
in the ocean’s upper layers, leveraging the ARGO dataset to learn statistical properties and
reconstruct past fields from before the ARGO era. While promising, these methods are not
ideal for reconstructing fields in regions that have never been intensively sampled, as statis-
tical inference may not be reliable in such areas. For instance, trapped flow over seamounts
may not always exhibit a clear signature at the surface (Venaille, 2012; G. C. Johnson &
King, 2023). While moorings or deep ARGO floats provide useful local information on deep
flows, global maps of deep ocean circulation can only be inferred using data assimilation
techniques that combine data with flow models (Blayo et al., 2014). This approach has
provided unvaluable reanalysis datasets, even if some unexpected behavior is also reported
in some regions, see e.g. Lellouche et al. (2021). While successful for operational purposes,
assimilation methods such as 4DVAR or the Ensemble Kalman Filter are often difficult
to implement and computationally expensive. On the other hand, SSH interpolation via
Deep Learning have been proven skillfull to reconstructing subsurface mesoscale structures
(Manucharyan et al., 2021). In all those cases, combining data from observations with
dynamical constraints or deep learning approaches typically requires the introduction of a
spatial grid, which incurs a significant computational cost as the spatio-temporal resolution
increases. This highlights the need for more flexible methods that can incorporate dynamical
constraints within a mesh-free framework. This is precisely where PINNs offer potentially
an advantage.
PINNs, a grid-free assimilation technique – In a PINN, the physical state of the sys-
tem (such as current velocity and density) is represented as the output of a neural network,
while the input consists solely of spatio-temporal variables. The specificity of PINNs train-
ing is to ensure that the solution generated by the trained neural network not only satisfies
the observed data but also adheres to the differential equations that describe the system’s
dynamics. This is achieved by designing a training loss function composed of a data fidelity
term, which ensures consistency with the observed data, and a penalty term, which quanti-
fies the discrepancy between the network output and the assumed physical dynamics. The
use of PINNs provides a threefold benefit: it bypasses the need to specify artificial boundary
conditions when constructing the field in a given region, it is mesh free, avoiding thus the
–3–
manuscript submitted to JGR
need for discretization choices for the estimated field, and it provides useful flexibility in the
choice of flow models, which can be adapted from case to case.
Following the original proposal (Raissi et al., 2019), PINNs have been applied to a wide
range of fluid mechanics problems, from Rayleigh-B´ enard convection (Lucor et al., 2022;
Clark Di Leoni et al., 2023) to denoising measurements in stratified turbulence (Zhu et al.,
2024), among a vast number of other examples (Karniadakis et al., 2021). Yet, applications
of PINNs in atmospheric or oceanic field reconstruction are still in the early stages, see e.g.
(Millet et al., 2023; Yoon et al., 2024). Notably, (Bang et al., 2024) addressed recently the
ability of PINNs to reconstruct surface velocity field from surface drifter data. Implementing
the PINN method in a realistic context such as mesoscale ocean turbulence (from 30 to
300km) presents several challenges, especially when multiple temporal and spatial scale
are involved. Indeed, training these networks involves a delicate balance between ensuring
data fidelity and adhering to physical laws, which can complicate the optimization process
and lead to convergence issues, requiring the use of specialized techniques and strategies
(Karniadakis et al., 2021).
Contributions – In the present work, we investigate the potential of PINNs to recon-
struct deep ocean flows by leveraging minimal surface observations and sparse data from
intermediate depths. Compared to state-of-the-art PINNs learning techniques, the proposed
approach introduces a novel learning strategy by incorporating a multilayer training specif-
ically tailored to multilayered ocean models. We demonstrate that the proposed PINNs
can propagate information between vertical layers, reconstructing three-dimensional flow
dynamics even with limited direct measurements from the deep ocean layer.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed StrAss-PINN , we consider a simplified
wind-driven three-layer ocean model, a minimal yet representative framework for ocean
dynamics. The upper layer is observed through surface data (similar to SWOT-like altimetry
observations), while the interior and deep layers are observed by sparse point measurements
(similar to ARGO floats), as sketched in Fig. 1. By integrating these observations with the
known system dynamics, we show that PINNs can successfully reconstruct deep ocean flow,
even with minimal data. This work serves as a proof of concept for the use of PINNs in ocean
flow reconstruction, particularly in regions where data are sparse or indirect. Although this
study does not directly compare our method with traditional assimilation techniques, it
lays the groundwork for future research to refine and optimize this approach for real-world
oceanographic applications.
2 State of the art and context
2.1 Data Assimilation
Data assimilation is a particular case of inverse problems. One has access to measure-
ments of a signal altered by exterior known or unknown factors, such as noise, motion blur
or, most notably in our case, the inability to observe the entire domain. For example, in
the problem addressed in this work, observations are obtained from satellites and buoys,
leading to partial sea surface data due to satellite coverage patterns and limited subsurface
information resulting from the sparse data provided by buoys.
The typical approach to assimilation is a grid-based approach that can be framed as a
minimization problem, where the cost function consists of two terms: a data fidelity term
and a penalty that enforces predefined dynamics. The solution to the assimilation problem
corresponds to the minimiser of this cost function. Formally, the goal is to recover the
temporal sequence of 3d states u( t, x, y, z ), with each component of u representing different
variables (e.g., pressure, velocity, temperature), and ( t, x, y, z ) indicating spatio-temporal
locations on a grid of size N=Nt×Nx×Ny×Nz. Assuming partial observations of the
system at Mdistinct spatio-temporal points (represented by the vector d of size M), the
–4–
manuscript submitted to JGR
+ physics
Reconstructed ﬁeld
Pseudo-observations
Figure 1: Schematic view of our method. Available (pseudo-)observations are provided
by satellites for the surface and buoys in the ocean interior. They constitute the training
set the networks aims to fit. This way, our method assimilates them additionally using
explicit dynamics information through a physics-informed formalism to produce reasonable
reconstructed fields. Finally, the networks are evaluated on a grid covering the domain,
producing the reconstructed fields.
cost function to be minimized is defined as:
LDA(u) = ∥H(u)−d∥+∥D(u)∥ (1)
where Hrepresents the observation operator, which establishes the relationship between
the complete quantity to be recovered of size Nand the grid locations where observations
are available. Additionally, Drepresents the physical model. The first term is referred to
as the data term and ensures the reconstructed field matches the observed data d as well
as possible. The second term is the dynamic information and ensures the reconstructed
time series follows physical laws. Typically, Dis a discretisation of the explicit dynamics,
formulated as a partial differential equation on the Nt×Nx×Ny×Nzgrid, and the norm
∥ · ∥ can be either a squared L2,L1,TV, or Mahalanobis distance.
In this procedure, the physical model can be highly complex (in order to have satisfying
resolution) and the major hurdle is then to express the adjoint operator of this model in
order to compute the desired minimiser. This minimization problem is the one behind the
4DVar methods (Bocquet & Farchi, 2014). While the 3DVar strategy assimilates observa-
tions at a single time point without considering their temporal evolution, the 4DVar extends
this approach by incorporating observations over a time window to better capture system
dynamics, at the cost of increased computational complexity. Kalman filtering or extended
version for non-linear systems such as Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) or Ensemble Kalman
Filter (EnKF), on the other hand, adopt a probabilistic and sequential approach, updat-
ing the state estimate at each time step while dynamically propagating uncertainties, but
remains computationally expensive, especially for nonlinear or large-scale systems.
Several attempts to include machine learning in these approach have already been ex-
plored (e.g., 4DVarNet) (Arcucci et al., 2021; Fablet et al., 2021; Beauchamp et al., 2023).
Those methods combined standard assimilation techniques (cf. minimization of (1)) with
neural network architecture either to build end-to-end approaches or a network improving
the modeling of the map D. More precisely, the network predicts u t+∆tgiven utand the
regularisation term involves D(u) = u t+∆t−fθ(ut), encouraging the reconstructed field u to
adhere to the learned dynamics modeled by the neural network denoted fθ, with θthe net-
work parameters. They show very promising results already comparable to the best classical
approaches. For instance (Beauchamp et al., 2023) has reported a “ relative improvement
with respect to the operational optimal interpolation between 30% and 60% in terms of recon-
struction error ”. However, they are often implemented on surface reconstruction problems
–5–
manuscript submitted to JGR
and do not deal with the interior of the ocean due to a lack of data. Moreover, these meth-
ods are tied to a fixed grid, and as resolution increases, the cost of training the network can
grow significantly.
2.2 PINNs
A second class of approaches that combine deep learning and physics models rely on
the Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN) framework and will be at the core of this
contribution. The standard formulation of PINNs can be expressed as (1), with a key
distinction: the field u is modeled by a neural network (i.e., u = fθ(t,x)) that uses spatio-
temporal coordinates as inputs to predict the field values. In this work, following previous
application to fluid mechanics problems (Raissi et al., 2019), we propose revisiting ocean
data assimilation procedure using PINNs, which offer the key advantage of bypassing grid-
based formulations that become computationally intensive when recovering 3d+t field such
as subsurface fields.
We denote u θas a shallow neural network parameterized by θ, a function of ( t,x), whose
output is the desired field for a specific spatio-temporal location. The PINN formulation
reduces to finding the optimal network u θwith parameters θthat minimize the following
loss:
LPINN(θ) =1
nX
(t,x)∈I(uθ(t,x)−d(t,x))2+λ∥D(uθ, ∂tuθ,∇uθ, . . .)∥2. (2)
where Idenotes either a set of npoints where measurements d are available (for data
assimilation problems), a set of npoints that sample initial and boundary conditions (to
solve a well-posed Cauchy problem), or a combination of both. Initially, the formalism of
PINNs has been developed to approach solutions to a well posed Cauchy problem with a
chosen initial condition, boundary conditions and a chosen dynamics.
The loss function thus consists of a data term and a regularization term measuring
deviation from the dynamical prior. It serves as an objective function that encourages the
minimiser to both closely solve the prior PDE D(u, ∂tu,∇u, . . .) = 0 and ensure fidelity to
the observations d. The norm ∥D∥represents an L2norm over the spatio-temporal domain
of interest, which must be approximated (e.g., using a Monte Carlo method). This involves
evaluating the residual at a discrete set of collocation points that do not necessarily coincide
with the data points.
The computation of the loss function assumes that the network u θcan be differentiated
with respect to its input coordinates to compute ∂tuθ,∂xuθ,∂yuθ, and any higher-order
derivatives required by the prior PDE. In practice, this step is straightforward due to au-
tomatic differentiation, which allows handling a wide range of differentiable functions u θ.
This is a major advantage of PINNs formulation. This approach is considered mesh-free
because the field u is not discretized on a grid, unlike standard assimilation techniques.
In its original formulation, PINNs were implemented using a multilayer perceptron with
a tanh activation function for u θ, alongside a Latin Hypercube Sampling strategy to select
collocation points where the PDE residual is computed (Raissi et al., 2019). Since then,
significant efforts have focused on optimizing the choice of collocation points (Khoa Nguyen
et al., 2022), exploring alternative network architectures (Wang et al., 2024), and testing
different activation functions (Sitzmann et al., 2020), among other strategies (Karniadakis
et al., 2021). The algorithmic strategy itself is rarely studied, as it generally relies on a
single neural network fully trained using standard optimization tools. In this study, the
specific layered structure of the underlying ocean dynamics will lead us to focus on both the
choice of the architecture and the algorithmic strategy.
–6–
manuscript submitted to JGR
2.3 Focus on the implicit neural representation SIREN
In this study, we focus on the SIREN model, a fully connected network that uniquely
employs sine activations after each layer, along with a specifically tailored network initializa-
tion (Sitzmann et al., 2020). More precisely, it has satisfying ability to learn simultaneously
a function through its outputs and its gradients, thus our choice to use it in our study. This
network architecture has proven useful in reconstructing various natural signals, including
flow reconstruction with PINNs in the context of Rayleigh-Benard convection (Mommert et
al., 2024). SIREN networks have also been used in ocean context, albeit without physical
constraints, to represent surface current as a neural field (J. E. Johnson et al., 2022).
In this study, we will consider a SIREN network to describe 2 d+tscalar fields :
Ψθ(t, x, y ) =WM·sin(. . . W 2·sin(W1·sin(Kxx+Kyy−Ωtt+φ) +b1) +b2). . .+bM(3)
where sine functions are taken coordinate by coordinate. Network parameters are
θ={Kx, Ky,Ωt, φ, W 1, . . . , W M, b1, . . . , b M},
where Kx, Ky,Ωt∈Rw×1,φ, bm∈Rw,Wm∈Rw×w,WM∈R1×wandbM∈R.
This implicit neural representation takes field coordinates as inputs and outputs a
scalar estimate of the field. The notion of resolution then shifts from a spatial resolution
on a discretised domain to an implicit resolution related to the size of θ. Empirically,
this implicit resolution corresponds to the spectral resolution. The smallest spatial and
temporal scales that the SIREN can generate are limited by the highest values of Kx, Ky
and Ω t. Therefore, these values must be carefully initialized to ensure the network can
capture the small physical scales in the signal.
SIREN is a particularly well-suited network for our task, as all activations are sine
functions. Indeed, as a result, ∂tuθcan also be expressed as a SIREN model with shifted
weights, since the derivative of a sine function is another sine function with a shifted phase.
This property extends to spatial derivatives and higher-order derivatives, such as the Lapla-
cian operator ∆. The stability of SIREN models under differentiation heuristically explains,
according to Sitzmann et al. (2020), why such a network model can impressively learn a
function and its derivatives simultaneously. This characteristic makes it an ideal candidate
for our purpose, which is to incorporate physical knowledge in the form of partial differential
equations into the learning strategy. This network architecture was initially introduced to
address image-related problems, but the authors also experimented it as a PINN to solve
a simple linear wave-propagation equation. In the present contribution, we aim to fully
exploit its potential for a more complex task.
3StrAss-PINN : New Physics-Assisted Neural network for Data Assimi-
lation in Stratified fluid
The proposed StrAss-PINN method builds on PINNs by adding a multilayer structure
to both the training loss and the training process. In this section, we present the method
through a concrete reconstruction problem for wind-driven, multilayer quasi-geostrophic
dynamics, using ground truth from a simulation of a classic double-gyre setup. This setup
models key features of midlatitude oceans, such as the Gulf Stream and the Kuroshio.
Pseudo-observations will be extracted from this quasi-geostrophic ground truth, and the
reconstruction will be compared to the full field of the simulation. For clarity, the method is
presented here for a three-layer quasi-geostrophic model, though it can be extended to more
layers. Details of the general multilayer formulation are provided in the Appendix Appendix
A. Note to the reader: There are two notions of “layers”—oceanic layers and neural layers.
We will clarify the context to avoid confusion whenever necessary.
–7–
manuscript submitted to JGR
3.1 Dynamical model: three-layer quasi-geostrophic dynamic
Layered structure of ocean models. Due to stable vertical density stratification and
the small vertical-to-horizontal aspect ratio, ocean models are often represented as layers
stacked on top of one another. In these models, stratification is defined by the density and
horizontally averaged thickness of each layer. Many advanced ocean models use multilayer
shallow water equations to capture large-scale stratification variations at the basin scale.
By taking advantage of the large rotation limit relevant to midlatitude flows, one can then
derive a simpler set of equations—the quasi-geostrophic model (Vallis, 2017). We focus here
on a three layer quasi-geostrophic model driven by wind. The motivation is twofold: first,
the quasi-geostrophic model filters out fast motions while capturing similar flow structures
to the shallow water model, and second, three layers are sufficient to describe many im-
portant features of mid latitude mesoscale ocean current. The principal features being the
intensification of western and surface currents, the propagation of Rossby waves, the forma-
tion of sharp eastward jets, and mesoscale vortex rings — hallmarks of oceanic turbulence.
This model provides therefore a minimal framework for understanding midlatitude ocean
currents like the Gulf Stream or Kuroshio (Vallis, 2017).
Flow model and parameters. We consider three layers of homogeneous density ( ρ1, ρ2, ρ3)
stacked vertically, as shown in Fig. 2(a). In each layer, the flow is 2D, non-divergent, and
can be described by stream functions ( ψ1, ψ2, ψ3), which fully characterize the dynamics as
scalar functions of ( t, x, y ). The flow takes place in a close basin with free slip boundary
conditions. The system is forced by zonal wind stress curl −∂yτx(y), which drives the upper
layer, and dissipates through the Ekman layer in the deeper layer, or via horizontal viscous
dissipation in each layer. To capture key features of midlatitude ocean dynamics, we need
to incorporate latitudinal variations in the Coriolis parameter using the β-plane approxi-
mation, which assumes linear variations of planetary vorticity with latitude. The resulting
system of equations is expressed as the following set of partial differential equations:
d
dt
1
∆ψ1−f2
0ψ1−ψ2
H1g′
1+βy
| {z }
=q1=−1
H1∂yτx+ν∆q1
d
dt
2
∆ψ2−f2
0ψ2−ψ1
H2g′
1−f2
0ψ2−ψ3
H2g′
2+βy
| {z }
=q2=ν∆q2
d
dt
3
∆ψ3−f2
0ψ3−ψ2
H3g′
2+βy
| {z }
=q3=−rE∆ψ3+ν∆q3(4)
withd
dt
ℓ≡∂t+(∂xψℓ)∂y−(∂yψℓ)∂xrepresenting the Lagrangian derivative, g′
ℓ=g·(ρℓ+1−
ρℓ)/ρℓis the reduced gravity between the ℓ-th and ( ℓ+ 1)-th layers, and Hℓdenotes the
height of the ℓ-th layer. The parameter rE=f0hE/2H3is the bottom friction coefficient,
with f0the Coriolis parameter and hEthe Ekman layer depth. The double-gyre framework
amounts to choosing τx=τ0cos(2 πy/L ), with Las the domain size and τ0the maximum
wind stress amplitude. Additionally, we made the classical rigid assumption, which simplifies
to assuming that gHℓ/f2
0→+∞. Typical flow fields obtained with this model are shown
in Fig. 2(b) for parameters presented in Tab. 1.
3.2 Posing the reconstruction problem with pseudo-observations
Our idealized quasi-geostrophic framework aims to address a typical ocean assimila-
tion problem, where abundant surface data—usually from satellites like SWOT—are avail-
able, alongside sparser subsurface data—from ARGO floats. In real observations, ARGO
floats typically provide measurements at a depth of 1 km for 9 days, then descend much
deeper—usually to 2,000 meters, but up to 6,000 meters for deep-ARGO floats—before re-
turning to the surface to transmit data and then resuming their descent. In our stratified
–8–
manuscript submitted to JGR
H1H2H3ψ2ψ3ψ1<latexit sha1_base64="Kx6XtcGyWX2uMgAnr3Ffrf6ktgo=">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</latexit>Surface layer
<latexit sha1_base64="iKKmfBci5EbZ27dehh8sMEs2TKc=">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</latexit>Intermediate layer
<latexit sha1_base64="LS2a/0PX+f0xdqmcXSvgkkYpVIg=">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</latexit>Bottom layer
(a) Sketch of the model (b) Typical output of the model
Figure 2: (a) Illustration of the three-layer framework with 2d flows in each layer encoded
in stream functions ψi. (b) Kinetic energy fields in a three layers quasi-geostrophic model
of the ocean. Three important features appear in the generated stream functions. First, as
expected with the choice of wind forcing, two gyres are formed at the surface and induce
a jet stream in the center of the domain. Second, we notice Rossby waves propagating in
each layer. Third, small eddies go up the jet stream.
Coefficient Value Coefficient Value
H1 350 m β 1.7e−11 m−1·s−1
H2 750 m f0 9.4e−5 s−1
H3 2900 m τ0 1.3e−5 m2·s−2
g′
1 0.025 m ·s−2ν 40 m2·s−1
g′
2 0.0125 m ·s−2hE 2 m
L 4000 km
Table 1: Coefficients used in the implementation we study here.
framework, this process is represented by satellite data such as SWOT for the first layer,
sparse random measurements for the second layer and even sparser observations for the
third layer.
Concretely, following the notation in (2), we define a set of observation Iℓfor each layer
ℓ={1,2,3}, incorporating SWOT-like measurements of ψ1, daily Argo-like measurements
ofψ2, and Argo-like measurements of ψ3every 10 days, as shown in Fig. 3. The complete set
of observations is denoted as I=I1∪ I2∪ I3. More details about this set will be provided
in subsection 4.1.
3.3 StrAss-PINN training network and loss
To train the network using partially observed data and evaluate it outside the observed
domain, we design a multilayer algorithm, using the fact that the ocean model is represented
by vertically stacked layers, each with homogeneous density but differing from one layer to
the next in a stably stratified structure.
In the context of the three-layer quasi-geostrophic model, we consider three differential
operators D1,D2,D3allowing us to rewrite quasi-geostrophic dynamics (4) as:


D1(ψ1,∇ψ2) = 0
D2(ψ2,∇ψ1,∇ψ3) = 0
D3(ψ3,∇ψ2) = 0(5)
–9–
manuscript submitted to JGR
(I1) SWOT-like.
 (I2) Argo-like.
 (I3) Argo-like (deep).
Figure 3: In our set-up, observations are only provided by pseudo-measurement devices at
locations stored in I1,I2, andI3. These three sets are illustrated here. Every simulation
day, we have access to SWOT-like measurements of ψ1and Argo-like measurements of ψ2
and every 10 simulation day we have Argo-like measurements of ψ3.
with∇= (∂x, ∂y). We note that each layer interacts only with the layers directly in contact
with it, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). For example, the second layer interacts nonlinearly with
both the first and third layers. More generally, the operator Dℓin layer ℓinvolves only the
streamfunction ψℓof the current layer and the spatial derivatives of ψℓ−1andψℓ+1, i.e., the
velocity fields in the neighboring layers.
StrAss-PINN training network . This peculiar vertical structure of the flow model orga-
nized in layers encourages us to use separated networks to predict the stream functions and
let them interact during their learning, instead of relying on a single network to generate di-
rect estimates of ( ψ1, ψ2, ψ3). In what follows, we will reconstruct the three fields of stream
functions with three separate networks. We will use the following property: ψℓknows about
∇ψℓ+1and∇ψℓ−1but not directly ψℓ+1orψℓ−1. Consequently, for each stratification layer
ℓ, we design a network Ψ θℓtaking ( t, x, y ) as input allowing to estimate ψℓ, with network
parameters θℓ. Each network will take the form of a SIREN as described in (3).
StrAss-PINN training loss . The proposed minimization problem aiming to estimate the
parameters ( θ1, θ2, θ3) is formulated as the minimisation of the loss function LStrAss-PINN :
LStrAss-PINN (θ1, θ2, θ3) =3X
ℓ=11
|Iℓ|X
i∈Iℓ|Ψθℓ(ti, xi, yi, zi)−di|2+∥D1(Ψθ1,∇Ψθ2)∥
+∥D2(Ψθ2,∇Ψθ1,∇Ψθ3))∥+∥D3(Ψθ3,∇Ψθ2)∥.(6)
The quantity of interest are the estimated fields bψℓ:= Ψ bθℓwith
(bθ1,bθ2,bθ3) = argmin
(θ1,θ2,θ3)LStrAss-PINN (θ1, θ2, θ3).
StrAss-PINN algorithmic strategy . In order to look for such a minimiser, we introduce
a strategy guided by the stratified structure of the quasi-geostrophic model and the natural
hierarchy between stratification layers. We propose to learn each oceanic layer successively
starting from the surface down to the deep layer as sketched in Fig. 4 and explained as
follows. Such a strategy is a block-minimization procedure that consists in solving, for each
–10–
manuscript submitted to JGR
iteration k,
θ[k+1]
1 = argmin
θ1X
i∈I1|Ψθ1(ti, xi, yi)−di|2+D1
Ψθ1,∇Ψθ[k]
2
| {z }
L(1)
StrAss-PINN 
θ1,θ[k]
2
θ[k+1]
2 = argmin
θ2X
i∈I2|Ψθ2(ti, xi, yi)−di|2+D2
Ψθ2,∇Ψθ[k+1]
1,∇Ψθ[k]
3
| {z }
L(2)
StrAss-PINN 
θ[k+1]
1,θ2,θ[k]
3
θ[k+1]
3 = argmin
θ3X
i∈I3|Ψθ3(ti, xi, yi)−di|2+D3
Ψθ3,∇Ψθ[k+1]
2
| {z }
L(3)
StrAss-PINN 
θ[k+1]
2,θ3
Once the training of Ψ θ1has converged, we can compute an estimation of ∇Ψθ1that we
freeze (meaning we stop learning θ1) in order to define the approximate differential operator
D2(·,∇Ψθ1,·) and start learning the parameters of Ψ θ2using the loss L(2)
StrAss-PINN . Finally,
we construct D3similarly using a frozen estimate of ∇Ψ2to learn the parameters of Ψ θ3
using the loss L(3)
StrAss-PINN . The circulation of information is sketched in the diagram Fig. 4,
and the algorithm is summed up in Alg. 1.
StrAss-PINN initialization . The algorithm procedure is initialized with Ψθ[0]
2= Ψθ[0]
3= 0.
The motivation behind the choice Ψθ[0]
2= 0 is that the flow is much stronger at the surface
than in the interior of the domain, i.e. ∇ψ1≫ ∇ ψ2. Therefore, a fair approximation for
D1is to consider ∇ψ2= 0 everywhere. Similarly, the flow in the intermediate layer is much
stronger than in the abyss, hence the choice Ψθ[0]
3= 0. This strategy uses prior knowledge
of ocean dynamics, which are typically surface-intensified. In some specific cases, such as
above seamounts, the dynamics may instead be bottom-intensified. In that context, the
algorithm’s convergence may not be optimal. We will explore more efficient strategies to
account for these situations in future work.
Algorithm 1 StrAss-PINN
Require: Observations points: ( I1,I2,I3) and {(ti, xi, yi, di)}i∈Iℓforℓ= 1,2,3.
Collocation points: {(Tj, Xj, Yj)}j∈J.
whileLStrAss-PINN ≥εdo
fork=1 to K do
Get batchs from Iand define collocation points
θ[k+1]
1 = arg min
θ1L(1)
StrAss-PINN 
θ1, θ[k]
2
θ[k+1]
2 = arg min
θ2L(2)
StrAss-PINN 
θ[k+1]
1, θ2, θ[k]
3
θ[k+1]
3 = arg min
θ3L(3)
StrAss-PINN 
θ[k+1]
2, θ3
end for
end while
–11–
manuscript submitted to JGR
<latexit sha1_base64="CMFvvVImH2fuhFPOXT0xSbja0Kk=">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</latexit>k=1<latexit sha1_base64="KmUV6nxJgyxhVhmDn3yh780Uji8=">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</latexit>k=2<latexit sha1_base64="O+oEosXBvP8vZYU2zuz8WA82/1g=">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</latexit>k=3
<latexit sha1_base64="hb8ASWBOv7POec7b45CrKK9qVYs=">AAAC23icjVHLSsNAFD2Nr1pfUcGNm2ARXJVERF0W3bisYB/Q1pCk0zo0TUIyEUrtyp249Qfc6v+If6B/4Z0xBbWITkhy5tx7zsy91418ngjTfM1pM7Nz8wv5xcLS8srqmr6+UUvCNPZY1Qv9MG64TsJ8HrCq4MJnjShmzsD1Wd3tn8p4/ZrFCQ+DCzGMWHvg9ALe5Z4jiLL1rVYl4faoJa6YcGzrctTst8fjgq0XzZKpljENrAwUka1KqL+ghQ5CeEgxAEMAQdiHg4SeJiyYiIhrY0RcTIirOMMYBdKmlMUowyG2T98e7ZoZG9BeeiZK7dEpPr0xKQ3skiakvJiwPM1Q8VQ5S/Y375HylHcb0t/NvAbEClwR+5dukvlfnaxFoItjVQOnmiLFyOq8zCVVXZE3N75UJcghIk7iDsVjwp5STvpsKE2iape9dVT8TWVKVu69LDfFu7wlDdj6Oc5pUNsvWYcl6/ygWD7JRp3HNnawR/M8QhlnqKBK3jd4xBOetbZ2q91p95+pWi7TbOLb0h4+AEcTmHI=</latexit> ✓[k]1
<latexit sha1_base64="JY7BQS7m3F1X4Eco4xoW/Zbq2H0=">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</latexit> ✓[k]2
<latexit sha1_base64="EG7euPMaY30zU99pWuBOKPwSK1o=">AAAC23icjVHLSsNAFD2Nr1pfVcGNm2ARXJVERV0W3bisYB/Q1pKk03ZoXiQTodSu3Ilbf8Ct/o/4B/oX3hlTUIvohCRnzr3nzNx77dDlsTCM14w2Mzs3v5BdzC0tr6yu5dc3qnGQRA6rOIEbRHXbipnLfVYRXLisHkbM8myX1ezBmYzXrlkU88C/FMOQtTyr5/MudyxBVDu/1SzHvD1qij4TVvvgatQYtMbjXDtfMIqGWvo0MFNQQLrKQf4FTXQQwEECDww+BGEXFmJ6GjBhICSuhRFxESGu4gxj5EibUBajDIvYAX17tGukrE976RkrtUOnuPRGpNSxS5qA8iLC8jRdxRPlLNnfvEfKU95tSH879fKIFegT+5dukvlfnaxFoIsTVQOnmkLFyOqc1CVRXZE3179UJcghJE7iDsUjwo5STvqsK02sape9tVT8TWVKVu6dNDfBu7wlDdj8Oc5pUN0vmkdF8+KwUDpNR53FNnawR/M8RgnnKKNC3jd4xBOetZZ2q91p95+pWibVbOLb0h4+AEvjmHQ=</latexit> ✓[k]3
Figure 4: Circulation of the information in the proposed multilayer optimisation process.
This illustration is provided for the three first iterations for the 3-layer quasi-geostrophic
dynamics but can easily be generated to Nlayers introducing Nnetworks alternatively
learning.
4 Numerical experiments
4.1 Data
Ground truth simulation – The ground truth ( ψ1, ψ2, ψ3) are obtained from the three
layers quasi-geostrophic model of the ocean introduced section 3.1. The values implemented
in the studied simulation are summarized in Tab. 1. The lengthscales of the system are:
the size of the domain L= 4000 km and the two Rossby deformation radii are L1∼39 km,
L2∼22 km. The corresponding timescales are of order T= 1/(βLi)∼22 days.
Typical flow fields obtained with this model are shown in Fig. 2. In the upper layer, a
western-intensified front is visible at the interface between two large-scale gyres, correspond-
ing to a coherent eastward jet similar to the Gulf Stream or Kuroshio. Coherent eddies can
also be seen propagating westward, corresponding to mesoscale oceanic rings. Additionally,
Rossby waves propagate across the entire domain, with their phase moving westward. In
the interior layers (Fig. 2(b)), the front, eddies, and waves are still present, supporting our
hypothesis that surface data can be used to help assimilate ocean interior information. To
summarize, this ground truth simulation features simple yet interesting flow structures, both
horizontally and vertically, making it an ideal framework for validating our reconstruction
method.
Pseudo-observations I– From these simulated data, we constructed pseudo-observations,
motivated by the framework presented in section 3.2, to combine SWOT-like data and
ARGO-like data. Recall that the pseudo-observation locations are organized into three
sets,Iℓ, each associated with a layer ℓ, and we make the simplifying assumption that a
measurement in layer ℓcorresponds to an observation of ψℓ.
The set I1in the surface layer is obtained by constructing a mask that replicates
the trace of a virtual SWOT-like satellite observation of sea surface height ( ψ1), following
Le Guillou et al. (2021). To do this, we virtually placed our 4000 km ×4000 km ocean basin
over the North Atlantic Ocean, at latitudes consistent with the Coriolis parameter f0+β0y.
We then used the coordinates of the actual satellite’s SWOT trajectory and its two swaths,
as if it passed over that domain. I1is the set of ( t, x, y ) coordinates for which the point
(x, y) belongs to one of the swaths of SWOT at time t. Over a period of 100 days, this
results in a total of 392,470 observation points, i.e., approximately 1 .5% of the domain being
observed each day.
The set I2in the intermediate layer corresponds to the locations of 800 independent
ARGO-like buoys measuring ψ2. Each day, the buoys are randomly distributed across the
–12–
manuscript submitted to JGR
513×513 domain grid. This is a realistic, though somewhat exaggerated, amount of ARGO
data for the size of our domain (Argo, 2024).
The set I3in the deeper layer is also obtained by randomly selecting 800 buoys in the
513×513 grid points, but the daily averages of the streamfunction are measured only every
ten days, consistent with the behavior of ARGO floats that dive every 10 days.
To facilitate this preliminary analysis, we assume that measurements always provide
direct information about the streamfunction in the observed layer. While this assumption
is reasonable for the low-frequency component of sea surface height measurements from
altimetry, it is an oversimplification for ARGO measurements, which provide information
on thermodynamic variables rather than direct streamfunction data. However, under the
assumption of geostrophic and hydrostatic balance, these measurements can be related to
vertical variations in the streamfunction, rather than the streamfunction itself. Future work
will focus on developing a more realistic representation of these measurements.
4.2 Algorithm
Neural network architecture . We deploy three SIREN neural networks, one for each
layer. In our experiments we explore the impact of Ω t, Kx, Ky, controlling the weights
of SIREN’s first layer as they are the only parameters of the network that can directly be
physically interpreted. In their paper, Sitzmann et al. (2020) set a maximal value ω0for this
first layer and initialise the weight uniformly between −ω0andω0. Conducting numerical
experiments, we noticed in our case that these values do not change significantly during the
learning. We thus decided to remove that randomness and set the values of the first layer
in the following way. First, we chose a maximal value for the pulsation ωmaxand one for
the wave numbers kmax. Then we fill Ω twith Nuniformly spread numbers between −ωmax
andωmax,Kxwith Nuniformly spread numbers between −kmaxandkmaxand finally Ky
with Nuniformly spread numbers between 0 and kmax. This way, the first layer covers a
wide variety of potential waves propagating in our domain of the form sin( kxx+kyy−ωtt)
with kx∈Kx,ky∈Kyandωt∈Ωt. This choice leads to N3waves. Choosing N= 5 is
what set the width of our network to equal 125. Note that adding negative values for kx
does not express more waves as the sine function is odd.
Collocation points J. Other important parameters to adjust that can affect the training
of the network are the number and the location of the collocation points. The higher it
is, the better the estimation of ∥D(·)∥L2(Ω). However, the number of collocation point to
consider is limited by the memory capacity of the machine used. We opted for Ncol=
13×batch size col= 266240. Compared to literature, this is relatively few as we only
have Ncol≈10×Nobs. It is usually recommended to have two or more orders of magnitude
difference between NobsandNcolbut we had satisfying results with this set-up. Adding
more collocation points would significantly increase the memory requirements of the method
and probably call for multi-GPU training, which we did not explore.
Minimization strategy for L(ℓ)
StrAss-PINN . We look for the minimiser of the loss function
using the gradient-based optimizer ADAM with learning rate of 1e-4 and batches of size
1/13 of the total available data. In accordance with other PINNs formulation, the input
and output are normalized. This is detailed in appendix Appendix C. All experiments were
executed on a machine with an Intel Xeon Platinum 9242 CPU and an AD104GL [L4] GPU
with 16 GB of RAM.
Regularization parameter . The main parameter to tune is the regularisation parameter
λ, the ratio of the data fidelity loss term to the physic-informed loss term Ldyn. It balances
these two parts of the objective function and controls how much the network trusts the
observations during its learning and how much the reconstruction is a physical field. A high
value for λwill thus lead to a very smooth reconstruction. We chose λ= 0.0001 following
the results shown in section 4.3.
–13–
manuscript submitted to JGR
The values of the hyper-parameters used in the following numerical experiments are sum-
marized in Tab. 2.
Parameter Value Parameter Value
Nobssurf 392470 Nobsint 80000
Nobsbot 8000 Ncol 266240
bsobs 30190 bscol 20480
kmax 10 ωmax 1.5
λ 1e-4 learning rate 1e-4
Table 2: Summary of the choices of hyper-parameters values in the network.
4.3 Results
Recovery illustration. The results presented in Fig. 5 are obtained after one step of
the alternate scheme 1 on pseudo-observations for a period of 100 days. We were able
to reconstruct not only the surface field but also the ones in the interior of the ocean,
leveraging physics knowledge to help the information propagate downward. Physically, it is
very interesting to see that the reconstructed stream functions include the physical features
resolved by the explicit model. Namely, the jet and the vortices detaching from it are
well resolved even though they are poorly observed. It also resolved the large scale waves
visible mainly in the right part of the domain for the first layer and everywhere for the
other two. It is notable to remark that we were able to represent a field with original
resolution N = 1,638,400 in a simulation at a resolution of 100 ×128×128 with only
3×w+w+ 2×(w×w+w) +w+ 1 = 32126 parameters in StrAss-PINN .
Impact of the regularisation parameter λ.This is an important parameter to tune
as it can guide the learning towards a more significant reconstruction even with fewer ob-
servations. However, it can yield a degraded reconstruction if wrongly set. The difference
in the quality of reconstruction when no regularisation, i.e.λ= 0, the right amount of
regularisation, λ= 10−4or to much regularisation is applied is shown in Fig. 6 at a spe-
cific time. Visually, displaying the reconstruction into a small movie shows that structure
in the reconstruction without regularisation are less smooth than those with regularisation
(i.e., jumps in wave phase). Additionally, in the left column, with increased regularization
(i.e., λ= 1), the field becomes smoother, especially for the first layer. The right panel of
Fig. 6 shows the difference between the reconstructed fields on the left and the ground truth
simulation, available everywhere in the domain, i.e.the reconstruction error. Qualitatively,
one can see less structure in the error field with λ= 10−4than with λ= 0 or λ= 1.
This shows the reconstruction captured more faithfully the physical features of the flow.
Quantitatively, the mean square value of this difference is lower when some regularisation
is used. The reconstruction scores evaluated on a 128 ×128 space grid and averaged over
the 100 days of assimilation are shown in Tab. 3.
Impact of SIREN initialisation. As mentioned above, the initialisation of the layers of
SIREN can impact the quality of the reconstructed fields. Exploring the space of hyper-
parameters by hand, we found the set of values showed in Tab. 2 to work very well and the
value of the reconstruction error to be stable around these values.
Impact of SIREN architecture. The number of layers and of neurons per layer were kept
low in order to keep a model as transparent as possible for us to choose the just mentioned
hyper-parameters by hand.
–14–
manuscript submitted to JGR
ψ1t = 0 days t = 20 days t = 40 days t = 60 days t = 80 days
d1(t= 0)
Ψˆθ1
ψ2t = 0 days t = 20 days t = 40 days t = 60 days t = 80 days
d2(t= 0)
Ψˆθ2
ψ3t = 0 days t = 20 days t = 40 days t = 60 days t = 80 days
∼d3(t= 0)
Ψˆθ3
Figure 5: Reconstructed stream functions in each oceanic layer of the quasi-geostrophic
model compared to the full simulated fields. A snapshot of the observation points is shown
next to the reconstruction to have an idea of the available data. Note that for the bottom
layer, these observations are only available every ten days. Physically, it is very interesting
to see that the reconstructed stream functions include the physical features resolved by the
explicit model. Namely, the jet and the vortices detaching from it are well resolved even
though they are poorly observed. It also resolved the large scale waves visible mainly in the
right part of the domain for the first layer and everywhere for the other two.
–15–
manuscript submitted to JGR
Ψˆθ1λ= 0 λ= 10−4λ= 1
Ψˆθ2
Ψˆθ3−0.2−0.10.00.10.2
(a) Reconstructed fields.
Ψˆθ1−ψ1λ= 0λ= 10−4λ= 1
Ψˆθ2−ψ2
Ψˆθ3−ψ3 (b) Difference to the ground truth.
Figure 6: (a) reconstructed fields at a single time step and (b) the difference to the ground
truth simulation for three reconstruction results: no regularisation (i.e. λ= 0), the right
amount of regularisation (i.e. λ= 10−4), or too much regularisation (i.e., λ= 1). Qualita-
tively, one can see from reconstruction error less structure with λ= 10−4than with λ= 0,
showing that the reconstruction captured more faithfully the physical features of the flow.
λ Surface MSE Intermediate MSE Abyss MSE
0 53.72 0.79 4.02
10−436.98 0.94 2.17
1 279.99 264.03 1548.08
Table 3: Mean square error of the reconstruction to the ground truth simulation multiplied
by a factor 104for clarity. Error in the reconstruction of the deep field was nearly halved
using the physics-informed loss as regularisation with the right balance to the data term.
Reconstruction using noisy data. In order to evaluate the stability of the method to
noisy data, we add white Gaussian noise with standard deviation of 0.05 and re-run our
experiments. We can clearly observe that StrAss-PINN successfully reconstructs the field
and, as expected, the required regularization parameter needs to be set higher for larger
standard deviations in the noise distribution. The illustration for the standard deviation
set to 0.05 is provided in Appendix Appendix B.
5 Discussion and conclusions
We have shown that StrAss-PINN is a promising tool for ocean data assimilation by
using an idealized three-layer quasi-geostrophic ocean model as the ”ground truth” and
realistic pseudo-observations resembling surface SWOT-like data and interior ARGO-like
data. This minimal setup is relevant for assessing the feasibility of reconstructing deep
ocean flows.
The first advantage of StrAss-PINN and PINNs in general is that they do not rely
on a predefined grid mesh. While there is still an implicit resolution (determined by the
–16–
manuscript submitted to JGR
number of network parameters), StrAss-PINN can enhance the resolution of the initial field.
For example, if there is a missing day of observations, the resolution can be increased
in the model. A second advantage is that, for data assimilation problems like the one
considered here, there is no need for knowledge of boundary or initial conditions in the loss
function. The third advantage of encoding the ocean field in a network is the highly effective
representation of the 3d field. This ability to compress information while maintaining well-
behaved derivatives opens up potential for future work in ocean data assimilation.
Several challenges remain to be addressed in future research in order to reconstruct
real ocean flows effectively with StrAss-PINN . First, we will need to determine the min-
imal amount of data needed for accurate flow reconstruction, exploring this question for
each ocean layer independently. It will also be important to assess PINNs’ performance in
comparison to more traditional assimilation techniques, such as 4DVar. Second, there is
significant potential to improve the efficiency of the PINN strategy used in this study. For
example, the selection of collocation points used to estimate the physical constraints in the
cost function can be optimized, as has been proposed in previous work (Nabian et al., 2021;
Khoa Nguyen et al., 2022). Finally, the approach will need to be extended to multilayer
shallow water models and eventually to more comprehensive ocean models, up to real-world
data.
In summary, this paper demonstrates the potential of Physics-Informed Neural Net-
works for reconstructing three-dimensional ocean currents from abundant surface data and
sparse interior measurements. The novelty of our method lies in its ability to reconstruct
not only surface but also deep ocean currents in this context. By combining available data
with the underlying dynamics of ocean circulation, PINNs offer a promising approach for
inferring deep ocean dynamics. Our study serves as a proof of concept for applying PINNs
to deep ocean flow reconstruction.
–17–
manuscript submitted to JGR
Appendix A Multilayer StrAss-PINN in the general setting
In the proposed model, we consider Ldifferential operators ( Dℓ)1,...,L allowing us to
rewrite quasi-geostrophic dynamics (4) as:


D1(ψ1,∇ψ2) = 0
Dℓ(ψℓ,∇ψℓ−1,∇ψℓ+1) = 0 ∀ℓ= 2, . . . , L −1
DL(ψL,∇ψL−1) = 0(A1)
The optimisation problem we now have to face is then to find a set ( θ1, . . . , θ L−1) of param-
eters that minimise the training loss function LStrAss-PINN :
LStrAss-PINN (Ψθ1, . . . , ΨθL) =1
nnX
i=1|uθ(ti, xi, yi, zi)−di|2+∥D1(Ψθ1,∇Ψθ2)∥
+L−1X
ℓ=1∥Dℓ(Ψθℓ,∇Ψθℓ−1,∇Ψθℓ+1))∥+∥DL(ΨθL,∇ΨθL−1)∥(A2)
In order to look for such a minimiser, we introduce a strategy guided by the stratified
structure of the quasi-geostrophic model and the natural hierarchy between stratification
layers. We propose to learn each oceanic layer successively starting from the surface down
as sketched in Fig. 4 and explained as follows. Such a strategy is a block-minimization
procedure that consists in solving
min
θ1X
i∈I1|uθ(ti, xi, yi, zi)−di|2+∥D1(Ψθ1,∇Ψθ2)∥
min
θ2X
i∈I2|uθ(ti, xi, yi, zi)−di|2+∥D2(Ψθ2,∇Ψθ1,∇Ψθ3))∥
...
min
θL−1X
i∈IL−1|uθ(ti, xi, yi, zi)−di|2+∥DL−1(ΨθL−1,∇ΨθL−2,∇ΨθL))∥
min
θLX
i∈IL|uθ(ti, xi, yi, zi)−di|2+∥DL(ΨθL,∇ΨθL−1)∥
Appendix B Noisy data
In order to test the stability of our method to noisy data, we artificially added to each
pseudo-observation a Gaussian noise of standard deviation 0.05. The result is shown in
Fig. B1. StrAss-PINN successfully reconstructs the fields significantly more accurately than
the option without regularisation which overfits the noisy observations. As expected, the
required regularization parameter needs to be set higher for larger standard deviations of
the noise than with untouched data.
Appendix C Data normalisation
It is a widely spread information that neural networks tend to prefer normalised inputs
and outputs. In order to fit with this idea, we transform the domain from Ω = [0 , T]×[0, L]2
to˜Ω = [−1,1]3and the outputs are normalised as well:
–18–
manuscript submitted to JGR
Ψˆθ1λ= 0 λ= 5·10−4
Ψˆθ2
Ψˆθ3
ψ1Ground truth
ψ2
ψ3
Figure B1: Reconstruction with noisy pseudo-observations.
ψ1←−(ψ1−µ)/σ
ψ2←−(ψ2−µ)/σ
ψ3←−(ψ3−µ)/σ(C1)
with µandσthe mean and standard deviation of the observed data for the first layer.
Now we need to rewrite the transformed differential operators. The advection operators
now read:
d
dt
i=rt∂˜t+r2
x[−∂˜y(σΨi)·∂˜x+∂˜x(σΨi)·∂˜y] (C2)
Let us write things explicitly for D1. For given networks Ψ 1and Ψ 2encoding the stream
functions in the two first layers, the corresponding encoded potential vorticity ˜Q1is:
˜Q1=r2
x∆ (σΨ1) +σΨ2−σΨ1
L2
1+β˜y
rx(C3)
with rt= 2/Tandrx= 2/L. And the operator now reads:
–19–
manuscript submitted to JGR
D1(Ψ1,∇˜Ψ2,∆˜Ψ2) =d
dt
1
r2
x∆ (σΨ1)−σΨ1
L2
1
+σ
L2
1d
dt
1Ψ2
+rxβ∂˜x(σΨ1)
−rxτ0
H1πsin(π˜y) +νr2
x∆˜Q1(C4)
The same treatment was done to D2andD3.
–20–
manuscript submitted to JGR
Open Research Section
The codes implementing StrAss-PINN are published in the Zenodo repository
https://zenodo.org/records/15075427
and the idealized ocean simulation data sets (including pseudo-observations) are pub-
lished in the Zenodo repository
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15074965 .
Acknowledgments
BD warmly thanks Emmanuel Cosme for useful discussions on deep flow reconstruction in
data assimilation. The authors also thank the CBPSMN platform at ENS-Lyon for providing
efficient computing resources for all the necessary numerical experiments. The platform uses
SIDUS (Quemener & Corvellec, 2013), which was developed by Emmanuel Quemener.
References
Archambault, T., Filoche, A., Charantonis, A., B´ er´ eziat, D., & Thiria, S. (2024). Learning
sea surface height interpolation from multi-variate simulated satellite observations.
Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems ,16(6), e2023MS004047.
Arcucci, R., Zhu, J., Hu, S., & Guo, Y.-K. (2021). Deep data assimilation: Integrating deep
learning with data assimilation. Applied Sciences ,11(3). doi: 10.3390/app11031114
Argo. (2024). Argo (oceanography) — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argo (oceanography) ([Online; accessed 12-
December-2024])
Ballarotta, M., Ubelmann, C., Pujol, M.-I., Taburet, G., Fournier, F., Legeais, J.-F., . . .
others (2019). On the resolutions of ocean altimetry maps. Ocean science ,15(4),
1091–1109.
Bang, C., Altaher, A. S., Zhuang, H., Altaher, A., Srinivasan, A., & Cherubin, L. (2024).
Physics-informed neural networks to reconstruct surface velocity field from drifter
data. Authorea Preprints .
Barth, A., Alvera-Azc´ arate, A., Licer, M., & Beckers, J.-M. (2020). Dincae 1.0: A convo-
lutional neural network with error estimates to reconstruct sea surface temperature
satellite observations. Geoscientific Model Development ,13(3), 1609–1622.
Beauchamp, M., Febvre, Q., Georgenthum, H., & Fablet, R. (2023). 4DVarNet-SSH: End-
to-end learning of variational interpolation schemes for nadir and wide-swath satellite
altimetry. Geoscientific Model Development ,16(8), 2119–2147.
Blayo, ´E., Bocquet, M., Cosme, E., & Cugliandolo, L. F. (2014). Advanced data assimilation
for geosciences: Lecture notes of the les houches school of physics: Special issue, june
2012. OUP Oxford.
Bocquet, M., & Farchi, A. (2014). Introduction to the principles and methods of data
assimilation in the geosciences. Retrieved from https://cerea.enpc.fr/HomePages/
bocquet/teaching/assim-mb-en.pdf
Carrassi, A., Bocquet, M., Bertino, L., & Evensen, G. (2018). Data assimilation in the
geosciences: An overview of methods, issues, and perspectives. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change ,9(5), e535.
Clark Di Leoni, P., Agasthya, L., Buzzicotti, M., & Biferale, L. (2023). Reconstructing
rayleigh–b´ enard flows out of temperature-only measurements using physics-informed
neural networks. The European Physical Journal E ,46(3), 16.
Fablet, R., Chapron, B., Drumetz, L., M´ emin, E., Pannekoucke, O., & Rousseau, F. (2021,
October). Learning variational data assimilation models and solvers. Journal of Ad-
vances in Modeling Earth Systems ,13(10).
Fablet, R., Chapron, B., Le Sommer, J., & S´ evellec, F. (2024). Inversion of sea surface
currents from satellite-derived sst-ssh synergies with 4dvarnets. Journal of Advances
–21–
manuscript submitted to JGR
in Modeling Earth Systems ,16(6), e2023MS003609.
Fox-Kemper, B., Hewitt, H. T., Xiao, C., Aalgeirsd´ ottir, G., Drijfhout, S. S., Edwards, T. L.,
. . . others (2021). Ocean, cryosphere, and sea level change. In Climate change 2021:
The physical science basis. contribution of working group i to the sixth assessment
report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change (pp. 1211–1361). Cambridge
University Press.
Fu, L.-L., Christensen, E. J., Yamarone Jr, C. A., Lefebvre, M., Menard, Y., Dorrer, M.,
& Escudier, P. (1994). Topex/poseidon mission overview (Vol. 99) (No. C12). Wiley
Online Library.
Fu et al, L.-L. (2024). The surface water and ocean topography mission: A breakthrough in
radar remote sensing of the ocean and land surface water. Geophys. Res. Lett. ,51(4),
e2023GL107652.
Guinehut, S., Dhomps, A.-L., Larnicol, G., & Le Traon, P.-Y. (2012). High resolution 3-d
temperature and salinity fields derived from in situ and satellite observations. Ocean
Science ,8(5), 845–857.
Johnson, G. C., & King, B. A. (2023). Zapiola gyre, velocities and mixing, new argo insights.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans ,128(6), e2023JC019893.
Johnson, J. E., Lguensat, R., Fablet, R., Cosme, E., & Le Sommer, J. (2022). Neural
fields for fast and scalable interpolation of geophysical ocean variables. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.10444 .
Karniadakis, G. E., Kevrekidis, I. G., Lu, L., Perdikaris, P., Wang, S., & Yang, L. (2021).
Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics ,3(6), 422–440.
Khoa Nguyen, T. N., Dairay, T., Meunier, R., Millet, C., & Mougeot, M. (2022). Fixed-
budget online adaptive learning for physics-informed neural networks. towards param-
eterized problem inference. arXiv e-prints , arXiv–2212.
Le Guillou, F., Metref, S., Cosme, E., Ubelmann, C., Ballarotta, M., Le Sommer, J., &
Verron, J. (2021). Mapping altimetry in the forthcoming SWOT era by back-and-
forth nudging a one-layer quasigeostrophic model. J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol. ,38(4),
697–710.
Lellouche, J.-M., Greiner, E., Bourdall´ e-Badie, R., Garric, G., Melet, A., Dr´ evillon, M., . . .
others (2021). The copernicus global 1/12 oceanic and sea ice glorys12 reanalysis.
Frontiers in Earth Science ,9, 698876.
Lucor, D., Agrawal, A., & Sergent, A. (2022). Simple computational strategies for more
effective physics-informed neural networks modeling of turbulent natural convection.
Journal of Computational Physics ,456, 111022.
Manucharyan, G. E., Siegelman, L., & Klein, P. (2021). A deep learning approach to
spatiotemporal ssh interpolation and estimation of deep currents in geostrophic ocean
turbulence. Journal Of Advances In Modeling Earth Systems ,13(1).
Martin, S. A., Manucharyan, G. E., & Klein, P. (2023). Synthesizing sea surface temperature
and satellite altimetry observations using deep learning improves the accuracy and
resolution of gridded sea surface height anomalies. Journal of Advances in Modeling
Earth Systems ,15(5), e2022MS003589.
Millet, C., Khoa Nguyen, T. N., & Mougeot, M. (2023). Physics-informed learning for
modeling infrasound propagation in extreme weather conditions. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America ,154(4supplement), A269–A269.
Mommert, M., Barta, R., Bauer, C., Volk, M.-C., & Wagner, C. (2024). Periodically
activated physics-informed neural networks for assimilation tasks for three-dimensional
rayleigh-benard convection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02970 .
Munk, W., Worcester, P., & Wunsch, C. (1995). Ocean acoustic tomography . Cambridge
University Press.
Nabian, M. A., Gladstone, R. J., & Meidani, H. (2021, April). Efficient training of physics-
informed neural networks via importance sampling. Computer-Aided Civil and Infras-
tructure Engineering ,36(8), 962–977. doi: 10.1111/mice.12685
Oulhen, E., Kolodziejczyk, N., Tandeo, P., Blanke, B., & S´ evellec, F. (2024). Reconstructing
the ocean state using argo data and a data-driven method. Journal of Atmospheric
–22–
manuscript submitted to JGR
and Oceanic Technology .
Quemener, E., & Corvellec, M. (2013). SIDUS—the Solution for Extreme Deduplication of
an Operating System. Linux J. ,2013 (235).
Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., & Karniadakis, G. (2019). Physics-informed neural networks: A
deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear
partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics ,378, 686-707.
Sitzmann, V., Martel, J., Bergman, A., Lindell, D., & Wetzstein, G. (2020). Implicit neural
representations with periodic activation functions. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems ,33, 7462–7473.
Sonnewald, M., Lguensat, R., Jones, D. C., Dueben, P. D., Brajard, J., & Balaji, V. (2021).
Bridging observations, theory and numerical simulation of the ocean using machine
learning. Environmental Research Letters ,16(7), 073008.
Vallis, G. K. (2017). Atmospheric and oceanic fluid dynamics . Cambridge University Press.
Venaille, A. (2012). Bottom-trapped currents as statistical equilibrium states above topo-
graphic anomalies. Journal of Fluid Mechanics ,699, 500–510.
Wang, Y., Sun, J., Bai, J., Anitescu, C., Eshaghi, M. S., Zhuang, X., . . . Liu, Y.
(2024). Kolmogorov arnold informed neural network: A physics-informed deep learn-
ing framework for solving pdes based on kolmogorov arnold networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.11045 .
Wong, A. P., Wijffels, S. E., Riser, S. C., Pouliquen, S., Hosoda, S., Roemmich, D., . . .
others (2020). Argo data 1999–2019: Two million temperature-salinity profiles and
subsurface velocity observations from a global array of profiling floats. Frontiers in
Marine Science ,7, 700.
Yoon, S., Park, Y., Gerstoft, P., & Seong, W. (2024). Predicting ocean pressure field with
a physics-informed neural network. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America ,
155(3), 2037–2049.
Zhu, L., Jiang, X., Lefauve, A., Kerswell, R. R., & Linden, P. (2024). New insights
into experimental stratified flows obtained through physics-informed neural networks.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics ,981, R1.
–23–
