Statistical and machine learning ensemble modelling
to forecast sea surface temperature
Stefan Wola, Fearghal O'Donnchab,, Bei Chenb
aPI, University of Bonn - Germany, Bonn
bIBM Research - Ireland, Dublin
Abstract
In situ and remotely sensed observations have potential to facilitate data-
driven predictive models for oceanography. A suite of machine learning
models, including regression, decision tree and deep learning approaches were
developed to estimate sea surface temperatures (SST). Training data consisted
of satellite-derived SST and atmospheric data from The Weather Company.
Models were evaluated in terms of accuracy and computational complex-
ity. Predictive skill were assessed against observations and a state-of-the-art,
physics-based model from the European Centre for Medium Weather Forecast-
ing. Results demonstrated that by combining automated feature engineering
with machine-learning approaches, accuracy comparable to existing state-of-
the-art can be achieved. Models captured seasonal patterns in the data and
qualitatively reproduce short-term variations driven by atmospheric forcing.
Further, it demonstrated that machine-learning-based approaches can be used
as transportable prediction tools for ocean variables { the data-driven nature
of the approach naturally integrates with automatic deployment frameworks,
where model deployments are guided by data rather than user-parametrisation
and expertise. The low computational cost of inference makes the approach
particularly attractive for edge-based computing where predictive models
could be deployed on low-power devices in the marine environment.
Keywords: machine learning, sea surface temperature, forecasting,
modelling, statistical models
Corresponding author
Email address: feardonn@ie.ibm.com (Fearghal O'Donncha)
Preprint submitted to Journal of Marine Systems April 7, 2020arXiv:1909.08573v2  [physics.ao-ph]  5 Apr 2020
1. Introduction
Sea surface temperature (SST) is a common indicator of primary produc-
tivity in aquaculture [ 1], critical for operation of marine-based industries such
as power plants [ 2], while being central to better understanding interactions
between the ocean and the atmosphere [ 3]. Recent decades has seen enormous
progress in approaches to sample SST. In particular, satellite technology has
vastly increased the granularity of measurements that are possible, providing
long-term global measurements at varying spatial and temporal resolution.
MODIS (or Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) is a key instru-
ment aboard the Terra and Aqua satellites, which acquire imagery data for
36 spectral bands, from which information on a range of oceanic processes,
including SST, can be extracted.
Concurrently, improvements in high-resolution ocean models together
with increased computational capabilities have made sophisticated data-
assimilation (DA) schemes feasible { leading to a number of reanalysis products
that provide accurate forecasts across broad spatial and temporal scales.
Reanalyses yield numerical estimates of the true ocean state by combining
models with observations to improve short-term predictions by providing
more representative initial conditions. A state-of-the-art reanalysis is the
ERA5 global dataset from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather
Forecasts (ECMWF) [ 4]. It provides short-term SST forecasts (and hindcasts)
on a 32 km horizontal grid at hourly intervals from a numerical synthesis of
ocean models, atmospheric forcing uxes, and SST measurements.
These analysis and forecasting systems face a number of scientic, technical,
and practical challenges.
The computational and operational requirements for ocean simulations
at appropriate scales are immense and require high performance com-
puting (HPC) facilities to provide forecasts and services in practical
time frames [5].
Operational forecasting systems require robust data assimilation schemes
that takes account of biases and errors in models and observations [6].
A consequence of these challenges is that operational forecasting systems are
only feasible for large research centres or collaborations who have access to
large-scale computing resources and scientic expertise.
An alternative approach based on data-intensive computing [ 7], leverages
the large datasets generated by ocean monitoring and modelling tools to
2
train machine-learning-based forecasting models. Once trained, the com-
putational expense of these products are negligible, and conceptually, one
can develop transportable models that can be trained to learn features at
dierent geographical location. This paper presents a suite of data-driven
modelling approaches for developing robust systems to predict sea-surface
temperature (SST). An automatic feature-engineering module was imple-
mented to identify the key features at disparate geographical locations to
provide a transportable forecasting system. Finally, the dierent models
were averaged using a model-scoring and weighting approach to provide an
ensemble prediction that outperformed the best-performing individual model.
Contributions are as follows:
We evaluated the predictive skill of a range of data-driven modelling
approaches from the perspective of (1) balancing computational com-
plexity with predictive skill and (2) leveraging ensemble aggregation to
improve robustness.
We developed an autonomous feature-engineering module to (1) improve
the portability of the model to dierent geographical locations and
(2) reduce the appetite for training data by providing a more intelligent
supply of explanatory variables.
Finally, we assessed performance of the modelling framework globally,
against a state-of-the-art physics-based model.
While the idea of using machine learning (ML) to provide computation-
ally cheaper surrogate models has been previously explored, the distinctive
characteristics of SST lie in their complex temporal dependence structure
and multi-level seasonality. To our knowledge, this application has not yet
been considered in the existing literature. We demonstrate the viability of
the approach to capture the short- and long-term trends: integrating dierent
ML based models with dierent temporal performance characteristics in an
ensemble approach provides accuracy on par with large scale complex models.
In the next section, we discuss prior research in the domain. Subsequently,
the dierent models are introduced along with the feature extraction and
ensemble aggregation techniques. Section 5 compares performances of the
dierent models along with the predictive accuracy of individual and ensemble
aggregated models. The portability of the system to dierent geographical
locations is discussed. Finally, we present conclusions from the research and
discuss future work.
3
2. Related Work
A wide variety of operational SST forecasting products exist that leverage
physics-based circulation modelling and data assimilation to resolve temper-
ature distributions. A representative example is the forecasting system for
the North-West Atlantic from the NEMO Community Ocean Model, which
provides a variety of ocean variables at 12 km resolution. Inputs to the
system include: lateral boundary conditions from the open-ocean supplied
by a (coarser) global model, atmospheric uxes from the Met Oce Unied
Model and river inputs from 320 European rivers [ 8]. Other examples include
the National Centers for Environmental Prediction Climate Forecast System,
which provides global predictions of SST at 110 km resolution [ 9], and the US
Navy HYCOM Global Forecasting System, which provides 5-day forecasts at
resolution ranging from 4{20 km [ 10], together with localised, regional models
at higher resolution [ 12,11,13]. The common feature of these modelling
systems is the high computational demands that generally limit either the
precision (coarse global models) or the size of the domain (high-resolution,
regional models).
Due to the heavy computational overhead of physical models, there is an
increasing trend to apply data-driven deep-learning (DL) / machine-learning
methods to model physical phenomena [ 14,15]. Application of ML-based
approaches has been categorised into three areas [16]:
1.The system's deterministic model is computationally expensive and ML
can be used as a code accelerator.
2.There is no deterministic model but an empirical ML-based model can
be derived using existing data.
3.Classication problems where one wish to identify specic spatial pro-
cesses or events.
A number of studies have investigated data-driven approaches to provide
computationally cheaper surrogate models, applied to such things as wave
forecasting [ 17], air pollution [ 18], viscoelastic earthquake simulation [ 19],
and water-quality investigation [ 20]. Pertinent examples include: ML based
approaches to spatially interpolate environmental variables and improve
precision of solution [ 21]; DL-based approaches to increase the resolution
of satellite imagery through down-scaling techniques [ 22]; and data-mining
applied to the large datasets generated by ocean monitoring and modelling
tools to identify pertinent events such as harmful algal blooms [23].
4
Distinctive characteristics of SST are their complex temporal-dependence
structure and multi-level seasonality. There are only a few options to describe
systems with such characteristics, including: (1) Generalised Additive Models
(GAMs) from classic statistics, (2) Random Forest (RF) and extreme gradient
boosting (XGBoost) from ML, and (3) Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models from DL. These ve models are
all considered in this paper.
3. Machine Learning
Given sucient data, ML models have the potential to successfully detect,
quantify, and predict various phenomena in the geosciences. While physics-
based modelling involves providing a set of inputs to a model which generates
the corresponding outputs based on a non-linear mapping encoded from a
set of governing equations, supervised machine learning instead learns the
requisite mapping by being shown large number of corresponding inputs and
outputs. In ML parlance, the model is trained by being shown a set of inputs
(called features) and corresponding outputs (termed labels) from which it
learns the prediction task { in our case, given some specic atmospheric mea-
surements we wish to predict the sea surface temperature. With availability
of sucient data, the challenge reduces to selecting the appropriate ML model
or algorithm, and prescribing suitable model settings or hyperparameters .
A model hyperparameter is a characteristic of a model that is external to
the model and whose value cannot be estimated from data. In contrast, a
parameter is an internal characteristic of the model and its value can be
estimated from data during training.
Classical works in machine learning and optimisation, introduced the
"no free lunch" theorem [ 24], demonstrating that no single machine learning
algorithm can be universally better than any other in all domains { in eect,
one must try multiple models and nd one that works best for a particular
problem. This study considers ve dierent machine learning algorithms
to predict SST. The study aims to 1) evaluate the performance of each to
predict SST, 2) investigate whether simple model aggregation techniques can
improve predictive skill and 3) provide insight that can be used to guide
selection of appropriate model for future studies. While the specics of
each individual model vary, the fundamental approach consists of solving an
optimisation problem on the training data until the outputs of the machine
learning model consistently approximates the results of the training data.
5
In the remainder of this section, we will describe each ML model used and
provide heuristics for the selection of appropriate hyperparameters. The
objective can be summarised as relating a univariate response variable yto a
set of explanatory variables x=x1;x2;:::;xi(representing for example, air
temperature, seasonal identier, current SST, etc.).
3.1. Generalised Additive Models
Linear regression models are ubiquitous in statistical modelling and pre-
diction providing a simple technique to relate predictors or features to the
outcome. The relationship is linear and can be written for a single instance
as:
y=0+1x1+:::+ixi+ (1)
where thei's are unknown parameters or coecients that must be determined,
the variables xiare features that can explain the response variable y, and the
erroris a Gaussian random variable with expectation zero.
The appeal of the linear regression model lies primarily with its simplicity
and ease of interpretability. Since prediction is modelled as a weighted sum of
the features, one can easily quantify the eect of changes to features on the
outcome. This simplicity is also its greatest weakness since in many real-world
situations: the relationship between the features and the outcome might be
nonlinear, features may interact with each other, and the assumption of a
Gaussian distribution of errors may be untrue.
Generalised Additive Models (GAMs) extend on linear models by instead
relating the outcome to unknown smooth functions of the features. Predicting
yfrom the vector of covariates x, at timetis as [25]:
g(y) =+f1(x1) +f2(x2) +:::+fi(xi) +; (2)
where each fi()is an unspecied function and g(:) is a link function dening
how the response variable relates to the linear predictor of explanatory
variables (e.g. binomial, normal, Poisson) [26].
The functions fi()can be estimated in many ways, most of which involve
computer-intensive statistical methods. The basic building block of all these
variations is a scatterplot smoother, which takes a scatter plot and returns a
tted function that reasonably balances smoothness of the function against
t to the data. The estimated function fi(xi)can then reveal possible
nonlinearities in the eect of the explanatory variable xi. GAM models are
particularly appealing for analysing time-series datasets in the geosciences
6
due to interpretability, additivity of signal and regularisation: as mentioned,
GAM lends itself towards interpretable models where the contribution of
each explanatory variable is easily visualised and interpreted; time-series
signals can be often explained by multiple additive components such as trends,
seasonality and daily uctuations which can be readily incorporated in GAM
models; as opposed to simpler regression models targeted only at reducing the
error, GAM admits a tuning parameter that guides the "smoothness" of the
model prediction (allowing us to explicitly balance the bias/variance tradeo)
[27]. This parameter as well as the number of splines and polynomial-spline
order are typically specied by the user based on heuristics, experience and
model performance.
3.2. Random Forest
Moving from statistical learning models such as GAM to those from the
machine learning library, Random Forests (RF) have demonstrated excellent
performance in complex prediction problems characterised by a large number
of explanatory variables and nonlinear dynamics. RF is a classication and
regression method based on the aggregation of a large number of decision
trees. Decision trees are a conceptually simple yet powerful prediction tool
that breaks down a dataset into smaller and smaller subsets while at the same
time an associated decision tree is incrementally developed. The resulting
intuitive pathway from explanatory variables to outcome serves to provide an
easily interpretable model.
In RF [ 28], each tree is a standard Classication or Regression Tree
(CART) that uses what is termed node "impurity" as a splitting criterion and
selects the splitting predictor from a randomly selected subset of predictors
(the subset is dierent at each split). Each node in the regression tree
corresponds to the average of the response within the subdomains of the
features corresponding to that node. The node impurity gives a measure of
how badly the observations at a given node t the model. In regression trees
this is typically measured by the residual sum of squares within that node.
Each tree is constructed from a bootstrap sample drawn with replacement
from the original data set, and the predictions of all trees are nally aggregated
through majority voting. [29]
While RF is popular for its relatively good performance with little hy-
perparameter tuning (i.e. works well with the default values specied in
the software library), as with all machine learning models it is necessary to
consider the bias-variance tradeo { the balance between a model that tracks
7
the training data perfectly but does not generalise to new data and a model
that is biased or incapable of learning the training data characteristics. Some
of the hyperparameters to tune include number of trees, maximum depth of
each tree, number of features to consider when looking for the best split, and
splitting criteria [30].
3.3. XGBoost
While XGBoost shares many characteristics and advantages with RF
(namely interpretability, predictive performance and simplicity), a key dier-
ence facilitating performance gain is that decision trees are built sequentially
rather than independently . The XGBoost algorithm was developed at the
University of Washington in 2016 and since its introduction has been cred-
ited with winning numerous Kaggle competitions and being used in multiple
industry applications. XGBoost provides algorithmic improvements such as
sparsity-aware algorithm for sparse data and weighted quantile sketch for
approximate tree learning, together with optimisation towards distributed
computing, to build a scalable tree boosting system that can process billions
of examples [31].
The tree ensemble model follows a similar framework to RF with prediction
of the form [31]:
^yi=(xi) =KX
k=1fk(xi); fk2F; (3)
where we consider Ktrees,F=ff(x)=wq(x)grepresents a set of classica-
tion and regression trees (CART), qrepresents each independent decision-tree
structure, and wq(x)is the weight of the leaf which is assigned to the input x.
Fis computed by minimising the objective function [31]:
L=X
il(^yi;yi) +X
k
 (fk);
with 
 (f) =1
2kwk2;(4)
withlbeing a dierentiable convex loss function (for example the mean
squared error) of the dierence between the prediction ^yiand the observation
yifor each realisation i. The regularisation term, 
, smooths the nal
weights to avoid over-tting ( is a regularisation coecient). Furthermore,
a restriction to a maximal tree depth serves to regulate model complexity.
8
3.4. Multi-Layer Perceptron
The rst DL-based approach investigated was a Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) model. An MLP network solves an optimisation problem to compute
the weights and biases that represent the nonlinear function mapping inputs
to the best representation of outputs, ^ y:
g(x;) =^ y: (5)
denotes the mapping matrix of weights and biases that represents the
relationship between SST and explanatory variables, xin the form of a neural
network.
An MLP model is organised in sequential layers made up of interconnected
neurons. As illustrated in Figure 1, the value of neuron nin hidden layer `is
calculated as:
a(`)
n=f N` 1X
k=1w(`)
k;na(` 1)
k+b(`)
n!
; (6)
wherefis the activation function, N` 1is the number of nodes in layer ` 1,
w(`)
k;nis the weight projecting from node kin layer` 1 to nodenin layer`,
a(` 1)
k is the activation of neuron kin hidden layer ` 1, andb(`)
nis the bias
added to hidden layer `contributing to the subsequent layer. The activation
function selected for this application was the rectied linear unit (ReLU) [ 32]:
f(z) = max (0;z): (7)
A loss function is dened in terms of the squared error between the obser-
vations and the machine-learning prediction plus a regularisation contribution
controlled by :
#=1
2mX
k=1ky(k) ^y(k)k2
2+kk2
2; (8)
where thejjjj 2indicates the L2norm. The regularisation term penalises
complex models by enforcing weight decay, which prevents the magnitude of
the weight vector from growing too large because large weights can lead to
overtting { a condition where the model ts the training data well but does
not generalise to new data [33].
By minimising the loss function, the supervised machine learning algorithm
identies the that yields ^yy. As shown in Figure 1, a machine learning
algorithm transforms an input vector (layer) to an output layer through a
9
Figure 1: Schematic of an MLP machine learning network as illustrated in [17].
number of hidden layers. The machine learning model is trained on a data
set to establish the weights parameterising the space of nonlinear functions
mapping from xtoy.
Hyperparameter tuning is required to balance the eective capacity of the
model and the complexity of the task. In neural network type approaches,
increasing the number of layers and of hidden units per layer increases the
capacity of the model to represent complicated functions. Hence increasing
the depth of the network can improve performance on the training data
but run the risk of overtting { thereby reducing generalisation potential.
Standard hyperparameters to tune in neural networks include the number of
layers, number of nodes and the regularisation coecient .
3.5. Long short-term Memory Model
Cognisant of the temporal nature of the data, we investigated the per-
formance of recurrent neural network (RNN) type models. A fundamental
10
extension of RNNs compared to MLP is parameter sharing across dierent
parts of the model. This has intuitive applicability to the forecasting of
time-series variables with historical dependency. An RNN with a single cell
recursively computes the hidden vector sequence hand output vector sequence
yiteratively from t= 1;:::;T in the form [34]:
ht=H(Wxhxt+Whhht 1+bh);
yt=Whyyt+by:(9)
where the Wterms denote weight matrices (e.g. Wxhis the input-hidden
layer weight matrix), the bterms denote bias vectors (e.g. bhis hidden layer
bias vector) andHis the hidden layer function which is typically implemented
as a sigmoid function. In eect, the RNN has two inputs, the present state
and the past.
Standard RNN approaches have been shown to fail when lags between
response and explanatory variables exceed 5{10 discrete timesteps [ 35]. Re-
peated applications of the same parameters can give rise to vanishing, or
exploding gradients leading to model stagnation or instability [ 33]. A number
of approaches have been proposed in the literature to address this, with the
most popular being LSTM.
Instead of a simple weighted dependency, `LSTM cells' also have an
internal recurrence (a self-loop), that serves to guide the ow of information
and reduce susceptibility to vanishing or exploding gradients. Each cell has
the same inputs and outputs as an ordinary recurrent network, but also
has more parameters and a system of gating units that controls the ow of
information. An LSTM model has a number of gates: input, output and
forget gates that decide whether to let information in, forget information
because it is not important, or let it impact output at the current timestep,
respectively. As new input comes in, it's impact can be accumulated to the
cell, forgotten or propagated to the nal state depending on the activation of
the relevant gates [ 36]. In analogy to the MLP, we use L2-regularisation of
weights represented by the parameter , in an equivalent manner to equation
8. More details on LSTM are provided in Gers [35].
3.6. Feature Engineering
In traditional modelling based on solving a set of partial dierential
equations (PDE), the relationship between inputs and outputs are clear {
founded on well-understood physics. Machine learning on the other hand relies
11
on the concept of learning complex, nonlinear relationships between inputs
and outputs. While the outputs are clear (the variable we wish to predict),
the inputs are more opaque and one wishes to consider all variables that
potentially contribute to the output response, while avoiding superuous data
that may hinder performance. When predicting SST, some of the variables
that may contribute include a wide range of atmospheric conditions (air
temperature, solar radiation, cloud cover, precipitation, wind speed, etc.),
autoregressive features (i.e. past values of the response variable { SST),
temporal information (e.g. season, day of year, time of day), and potentially
values at neighbouring spatial locations. Feature engineering is the process of
using domain expertise and statistical analysis to extract the most appropriate
set of features for a particular problem from the entire set of data that may
contribute. The role of feature engineering is to improve predictive accuracy
and expedite model convergence by selecting the most appropriate features
that explain the response variable and provide maximum value. Excluding
important data will limit the predictive skill of the model while superuous
data tends to add noise to the model.
Figure 2 shows multi-year SST data illustrating primary patterns. A monthly
rolling mean of the data (middle plot) was subtracted from the raw data
(top plot) with residuals presented (bottom plot). The seasonal pattern of
the data is evident with yearly cycle capturing a signicant portion of the
data variance. The data residuals largely represent short-term uctuations in
the data (together with sensor uncertainty component). The objective of the
modelling was to learn the nonlinear relationships between the explanatory
variables and the long- and short-term signals of the data.
For machine learning forecasts, the raw data themselves are rarely the most
informative and a number of combinations and transformations of the raw
data must be considered. The feature variables used for this study consisted of
SST historical time series data from MODIS Aqua satellite, atmospheric data
from The Weather Company (TWC), and time features (season, day of year,
etc.). From these raw data, several dierent types of features were designed
and investigated. The feature engineering process combined domain expertise
to initially select known variables inuencing SST, with statistical analysis
to explore strength of relationship between a large number of features and
the response variable. The dependence or correlation between each feature
and response variable was determined based on a univariate feature selection
using the SciKit-Learn [ 37] feature selection library. A subset of features
with highest F-scores [ 38] were retained. The implementation of the feature
12
selection approach is described in more detail in Section 4.2.
2025SST[◦C]
2025/angbracketleftSST/angbracketrightm[◦C]
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Year−2.50.02.5residuals[◦C]
Figure 2: SST time series from MODIS measurements (upper panel), monthly rolling mean
(middle panel), and residuals after subtraction of the monthly rolling mean from the SST
data (lower panel).
4. Methodology
Application of ML techniques can be reduced to a number of steps related
to: selection of appropriate ML algorithms, providing sucient data to train
the models, and selecting the correct model hyperparameters (settings or
parameters that must be dened outside the learning algorithm) for the
model. In the remainder of this section, we will describe the training data
used, provide details on each model considered and outline the application of
each model to the problem of forecasting SST.
4.1. Input Data
Training data were from the MODIS instrument aboard the NASA Aqua
satellite. MODIS SSTs are produced and made available to the public by
13
the NASA GFSC Ocean Biology Processing Group. The MODIS sensor
measures ocean temperature (along with other ocean products such as salinity
and Chlorophyll concentration) from a layer less than 1 mm thick at the sea
surface. Data are available from 2002 to present at 4 km horizontal resolution
and daily intervals [ 39]. Calibration of the Pathnder algorithm coecients
and tuning of instrument congurations produce accurate measurements of
SST with mean squared error (MSE) against in situ sensors<0:2C [40].
These accurate global SST measurement over a multi-decade period, serve as
an ideal dataset to extract insights using ML. Daily, weekly (8 day), monthly
and annual MODIS SST products are available at both 4.63 and 9.26 km
spatial resolution and for both daytime and nighttime passes. The particular
dataset we used was the MODIS Aqua, thermal-IR SST level 3, 4km, daily,
daytime product downloaded from the Physical Oceanography Distributed
Active Archive Center (PODAAC) [ 39]. This MODIS SST data served as
labels to the machine learning algorithm while the data were also used as
autoregressive (lagged) features to the model.
As described in section 3.6, various combinations of atmospheric variables
were provided as features to the model, extracted from The Weather Company
through their public API [ 41]. The variables used were the 18 atmospheric
quantities included as part of the standard weather variables described in the
API documentation [ 42]. While we do not have rights to redistribute The
Weather Company data, a free API key can be obtained to download the
data from the vendor.
A key part of any modelling study is validation of the prediction and
comparison against benchmark values. While not provided as inputs to the
models, we used data from ECMWF model data to assess predictive skill.
ECMWF ERA5 dataset provides an atmospheric reanalysis of the global
climate at 32 km horizontal grid at hourly intervals from a numerical synthesis
of ocean models and atmospheric forcing uxes [ 4]. We downloaded SST data
at the nearest grid cell to the MODIS dataset using the ECMWF Climate
Data Store API (CDSAPI) to serve as a validation dataset.
4.2. Model Setup and Training
As described in Section 3, there are three primary steps to deployment of
a machine learning model:
Feature engineering, where the requisite explanatory data are extracted,
processed and combined to be fed to the model (described in Section
3.6).
14
Selection of the most appropriate hyperparameters for the model.
Training the model by feeding the training data to the model which
nds patterns in the data that map the input data attributes to the
target.
The rst two steps were conducted on a dataset extracted from an arbitrary
location in the North Atlantic: (2728046:4500N, 3225043:7100W). MODIS
SST data were collected over 16 years from July 2002 (earliest available data)
to December 2018. Satellite measurements are prone to missing data { for
instance due to cloud cover. For this location, data was missing 57% of
days, which was representative of data availability at other locations also.
As data gaps are problematic for the training of time-series models (due to
auto regressive dependencies), linear interpolation between adjacent values
replaced the missing data. While this can introduce artefacts to the data,
the fact that missing values were evenly distributed across the entire dataset
and the time series nature of the data made interpolation the best approach.
Moreover, the secondary weather input, TWC reanalysis data, were complete.
As previously described, the experiments compared a number of feature
selection approaches to incorporate atmospheric and autoregressive eects.
Initially the most appropriate number of lags to specify as autoregressive SST
features were selected based on heuristics (dierent temporal scales involved
such as daily, seasonal, year) and a trial-and-error search of a limited number of
possible lags. To simplify analysis of lag selection, the models were considered
as autoregressive models for this stage (i.e. we only supplied SST at previous
timesteps as inputs and did not include weather data). We observed that
these simple autoregressive models provided adequate predictive skill for short-
term forecasting of up to two days (for longer-term predictions, atmospheric
features were critical for performance). Nevertheless, this simplied modelling
study enabled insight into the most suitable number of lags (or number of AR
steps) to include in each model deployment. For the GAM, RF and XGBoost
models, the optimal lags were found to be approximately 30 days, which
balanced computational tractability with predictive skill. To incorporate
seasonal eects (and also due to greater computational eciency), the MLP
and LSTM model were fed data from up to the previous 400 days (to extend
beyond one year of historical trend). It's worth noting that when including
AR features, it introduces a temporal dependency which is important if one
wishes to make forecast multiple days in advance { i.e. to make forecast for
dayt+2, predicted SST for day t+1 is provided as a feature. This allowed for
15
long-term prediction but introduced the possibility of systematic model error
and bias (i. e. prediction error accumulated). This is analogous to model drift
observed in numerical modelling studies where model forecast can diverge
from true state over time [43].
The AR features described above were combined with time features (season,
month and week of year), and various combinations of atmospheric features to
construct dierent model scenario inputs. Weather feature were selected from
atmospheric data consisting of 18 time-dependent atmospheric quantities
reporting standard meteorological variables such as, air temperature, solar
radiation ux, cloud cover and winds [ 41]. Three dierent model scenarios
were created from these with dierent combinations of atmospheric data,
namely:
all 18 atmospheric quantities at the desired time were fed to the model
(we refer to this scenario as TWC1).
To reduce the number of covariates (and hence network size and as-
sociated demands for training data), a feature-selection module quan-
tied the most important variables. Univariate feature selection was
performed by computing F-scores from the correlation of each single
features with the output label [ 38] and retaining the three atmospheric
features with highest scores as described in Section 3.6 (referred to as
TWC2).
This concept was further extended with time-dependent information by
assigning univariate scores to lagged values of the selected atmospheric
features in scenario 2, and choosing the lags with the highest scores as
features (referred to as TWC3). This reected that SST is also likely
to be inuenced by atmospheric conditions (e.g. air temperature) at
previous days.
The resultant set of features to be considered for each model were, AR
features with specic lag (AR), time features (time) and most appropriate
combination of weather features (TWC1, TWC2 and TWC3). For all ve
models these set of features were investigated and for each model the best
performing combination were selected that minimised error against the test
dataset. Emanating from the dierent characteristics and complexities of
the models it was not expected that a single feature combination would
provide best performance across all models. Instead eective machine learning
16
implementations requires a careful balance of appropriate features, model or
algorithm complexity, and hyperparameter selection.
The next stage of model setup considered hyperparameter optimisation
for each of the models. In general machine learning models have a number of
hyperparameters, and the selection of the most appropriate is a combination
of heuristics, expertise and trial-and-error. For each model, hyperparameter
optimisations adopted a greedy, grid-search approach over the user-dened
parameter ranges summarised in Table 1. The xandydata were split
into two groups, to form the training-data set composed of 90% of the 6018
rows of data, and the test-data set the remaining 10%. For each model the
learning algorithm was trained on the training data and then applied to the
test data set and the MSE between test data vector, y, and its machine-
learning representation ^ ywas calculated. The hyperparameter combination
that minimised this MSE was selected for each model. The selected values
are presented in Table 5 and discussed in more detail in Section 5 where we
evaluate model performance.
A number of Python toolkit libraries were used to access high-level pro-
gramming interfaces to statistical and machine learning libraries and to cross
validate results. The GAM model was implemented using the LinearGAM
API from pyGAM [ 44], Random Forest from the widely-used SciKit-Learn [ 37]
toolkit, and XGBoost from the python implementation of the software library
[31]. The deep learning models, namely MLP and LSTM were implemented
using the popular Keras library which serves as a high-level neural network
API [45].
4.3. Model Scoring and Aggregation
To assess the dierent modelling approaches, hyperparameters, and com-
binations of input features, the time series was split into training (90%) and
test (10%) sets. The models were trained to make a prediction one day ahead
based on feeding the previously described features and labels (measured value
of SST for that day). The test datasets were then used to evaluate the
performance of the model prediction against measured values.
As prediction depended on historic estimates of SST (i.e. a prediction for
one day ahead required information on the current SST), the model prediction
was fed back as a feature to the model in a recurrent fashion. Specically, the
rst test prediction ( t= 1) was made with measured values of SST (at time
t= 0) as a feature. For future predictions, the measured SST feature was
replaced with the prediction from the previous day, i.e. prediction at time
17
Table 1: Hyperparameters and ranges used for model design. See Section 3 for details on
each model hyperparameter
Model Hyperparameters
GAM # of splines/features 2f10;15;20g
polynomial-spline order 2f3;5;8g
2f0:001;0:01;0:1;1;10;100g
RF # of trees/features 2f100;200;500g
max # of features 2f3;5;10g
max depth2f5;10;15;20g
XGBoost # of trees/features 2f500;700;1000g
max depth2f5;10;15;20g
2f0:01;0:05;0:1;0:5g
MLP # of layers 2f5;10;20g
# of nodes/layer 2f20;50;75g
2f0:001;0:01;0:1;1g
LSTM # of layers 2f1;2g
# of units/layer2f1;2;3g
2f0:001;0:01;0:1;1g
t= 2 received as input feature, model prediction for time t= 1 instead of the
satellite derived value of SST, which in practise would not be available for
forecasting multiple days in advance. Scoring for the entire test dataset (562
days) proceeded in this manner. This made the study sensitive to propagation
of error, where a low skill prediction propagates through the entire forecasting
period (in a similar manner that error in initial condition or boundary forcing
formulation can propagate through the prediction of a physics-based model).
The mean average error (MAE) and mean absolute percentage error
(MAPE) assessed the accuracy of each model:
MAE =1
NtestNtestX
i=1j(y ^y)j;MAPE =100
NtestNtestX
i=1(y ^y)
y; (10)
whereNtestis the size of the training data, yis the measured data, and ^ythe
model-predicted equivalent. Finally, the models were aggregated into a single
best prediction weighted by the inverse MAPE of the test data [ 46]. Convex
18
weights for the models considered in this study were computed of the form:
Wm=MAPEmPp
m(MAPEm) 1
(11)
whereWmis the weight for model m,pis the number of models, and MAPEm
is the MAPE of model m.
5. Results
For each model implementation, we focused on identifying the optimal
combination of features and hyperparameters that maximise predictive skill.
Table 2 presents model-selection results considering hyperparameters and
feature engineering. The combination of model complexity and size of the
features datasets are evident. Relatively simple models like GAM and RF
provided best performance with more sophisticated feature engineering that
reduced the size of the dataset. However, MLP and XGBoost both yielded
the lowest test MAPE when provided with the full atmospheric dataset and
allowed to infer relationships from all variables and data labels.
In addition to MAPE accuracy, Table 2 also lists the run times needed to
train the corresponding models (on a commodity laptop). Training times were
within acceptable limits for all models, although signicant variability existed.
As expected, the LSTM had the largest computational demand { however
it also had the highest MAPE. This non-intuitive result demonstrates the
need to balance model complexity with the nature of the data. That is, na ve
selection might suggest that an RNN-based model such as LSTM is most
suitable for a time-series dataset. However, results demonstrated that the
LSTM model failed to capture the high-frequency variations in the data and
only captured the general seasonal patterns (the monthly rolling-mean trends
reported in Figure 2). The inability to capture short-scale variations is due
to the \long memory" for this model that interfered with learning short-term
variations. In contrast, simpler models with time-series information explicitly
included as features better learned short-term dynamics.
Figure 3 compares model predictions (see Table 2) for the test period to
MODIS data. Observing the time evolution of SST reveals that a suitable
model must represent two distinct time scale components. On the one hand
there is the smooth SST evolution governed by seasonality. This component
of SST evolution beneted from suppression of large uctuations. Of the
19
Table 2: Model-selection result for the two North Atlantic locations.
Model Features Hyperparameters Training time [sec] MAPE
GAM TWC3, time # of splines = 20, spline order = 8, = 10 1.67 2.27
RF AR, TWC3, time # of trees = 500, max # of features = 3, max depth = 20 19.09 1.97
XGBoost TWC1, time # of trees = 1,000, max depth = 5, = 0:05 0.21 2.17
MLP TWC1, time # of layers = 20, of units/layer = 20, = 0:01 11.18 2.07
LSTM TWC2 # of layers = 1, # of units/layer = 2, = 0:1 71.67 2.54
models studied, this criterion was fullled by the GAM approach, which
yielded lowest test MAPE with a large regularisation parameter = 10
(i. e., the penalty on the second-order derivative of tted single-feature func-
tions). The large regularisation eect together with the piecewise polynomial
components of GAM models contributed to a smoother time-series prediction
that still captured long-term trends, including correlation of data between
years. Similarly, the RF approach led to a comparably smooth SST evolution
but at signicantly lower MAPE than the GAM model. The most obvious
reection of the seasonal pattern is evident in the LSTM prediction which
produces a highly smoothed representation of the training data. The model
fails to capture any small-scale dynamics at the daily or weekly level instead
reproducing the seasonal heating/cooling eects only. Further analysis of
model parameters suggested this to be a result of the retained long-term
memory informing the broader trend only. On the other hand, the seasonal
cycle has superimposed on it short-term behaviour dominated by peak events
occurring at daily to weekly time scales. This is particularly evident in the
XGBoost and the MLP approaches where both yielded best performances for
smaller, which enabled them to better capture short-term events. It's worth
noting that while XGBoost and MLP captured the small-scale uctuations
better, RF returned lowest MAPE. To simultaneously take both aspects
into account, the nal plot aggregates models based on an inverse MAPE
weighting as presented in equation 11. As a preprocessing step, due to the
comparably poor performance of the LSTM model, it was excluded from the
ensemble. The ensemble average generates lowest MAPE indicating that a
relatively simple model-weighting aggregation approach can outperform an
individual best performing model [47, 48]
5.1. Transportability and Comparison to State-of-the-art
As the feature engineering and hyperparameter selection process is complex
and cumbersome, it is desirable to execute this procedure once and then use
the selected model at dierent locations. The objective being to identify
20
212427GAM, MAPE = 2.27
212427RF, MAPE = 1.97
212427XGBoost, MAPE = 2.17
212427MLP, MAPE = 2.07
212427LSTM, MAPE = 2.54
2015-09 2015-11 2016-01 2016-03 2016-05 2016-07 2016-09 2016-11
Date212427Ensemble Average, MAPE = 1.88SST[◦C]Figure 3: Test-prediction (orange curve) of SST at 2728046:4500N, 3225043:7100W
from dierent ML models trained on 12 years of preceding historical data compared to
measured SSTs (blue curve). Bottom gure presents ensemble average of all models based
on individual model MAPE. Feature combinations and hyperparameters adopted for each
model are summarised in Table 2.
the most appropriate model inputs (features) and settings (hyperparameters)
from a small dataset, which are then used to train (on new data) and deploy
(i.e. make forecast) the models at any location we wish to make SST forecast.
We investigated the performance of the model at a set of globally distributed
locations. Data (SST measurements and TWC weather variables) were
21
Figure 4: Predictive skill of a weighted ensemble average of GAM, RF, XGBoost, and
MLP models at a set of locations distributed equally between 54latitude. MAE (top)
and MAPE (bottom) metrics are presented to inform on absolute and relative errors. The
features and hyperparameters prescribed are presented in Table 2. The blue circles on the
top plot denote locations that are analysed in more detail in Section 5.2 and presented in
Figure 6.
collected in a 66grid of points within 1of shorelines between 54
latitude. This resulted in 730 locations globally. While the features and
hyperparameters were selected as noted in Table 2, the models were retrained
at each location in a similar manner as previously described using a 90%/10%
train and test data split. The resulting prediction was again an aggregation
of GAM, RF, XGBoost, and MLP results, where each model was weighted by
22
the inverse MAPE at each location to favour models with better performance
in the weighted average. Figure 4 presents the MAE and MAPE computed
at these 730 locations. Results demonstrate that MAE and MAPE were
less than 1C and 10%, respectively, at most locations. Table 3 presents
average error metrics over all locations. The MAPE-weighted ensemble
average returned MAE and MAPE of 0.68C and 7.9% respectively. These
values are comparable to ECMWF estimates on SST which returned values
of 0.56C and 12.3%, respectively. While ECMWF reports lower absolute
error, relative errors are noticeably higher. This suggests a tendency of the
numerical outputs to perform poorer in periods when temperatures are lower
(increasing relative error).
Table 3: MAE and MAPE averaged across all spatial locations presented in Figure 4.
Metrics are presented for each model individually, an ensemble averaged weighted by the
inverse MAPE and the nal column presents error metrics for a benchmark ECMWF model
against MODIS measurements.
Metric GAM RF XGBoost MLP Ens. Ave. ECMWF
MAE 0.78 0.72 0.79 0.89 0.68 0.56
MAPE 9.7 9.4 8.8 10.6 7.9 12.3
Figure 4 indicates some spatial variations in performance. In general MAE
is lower in the inter-tropics region than in southern or northern latitudes. This
eect is more pronounced when we consider MAPE values due to lower ambient
temperatures making relative dierences more pronounced. Further analysis
indicates that this spatial bias is largely driven by reduced data availability
in locations away from the tropics. Figure 5 presents the percentage of days
for which data was available for the study period (100% indicates that data
is available every day). We see a distinct pattern of higher data availability
over the inter-tropical regions which is possibly a result of increased cloud
coverage in southern and northern latitudes [ 49,50]. For all locations we
replaced missing data using linear interpolation which enables the models to
act on data-sparse regions but limits the amount of true data available to
learn the complex SST relationship. Further all error metrics were computed
on the raw data (without linear interpolation) which biases the evaluation
further towards locations with higher data coverage.
23
Figure 5: Percentage of the time (number of days over the entire 2002-2019 study period)
that the MODIS Aqua sensor reported SST estimates for all global points considered in
Figure 4.
5.2. Discussion of results
Time-series forecasts are vital in many areas of scientic, industrial, and
economic activity. Many ML methods have been applied to such problems
and the advantages of RNN-type approaches are well documented. The ability
of these DL algorithms to implicitly include eects from preceding time steps
is intuitively a natural t. However, this study demonstrated that when the
relationship between predicted values was not based solely on AR features
{ well-designed feature selection in conjunction with simpler ML methods
capable to more rapidly adjust to short-scale uctuations outperformed the
DL approaches.
Table 2 demonstrated that the important features needed to predict
at timet+ 1 are SST values at time t(and values at earlier time steps
dependent on selected AR features), atmospheric information at time t+ 1
(and potentially AR features of those), and time of year information. Hence,
prediction required inclusion of AR features while inferring relationships
between forecasted values of atmospheric data and the response variable,
SST. Figure 3 illustrated that the LSTM model failed to adequately learn the
relationship between explanatory variables and SST. Specically, the model
closely approximated seasonal behaviour (i. e., the long-term characteristics
24
of the SST) while failing to capture high-frequency variations (i. e., variations
in response to atmospheric inputs). In eect, the DL approach maintained
\memory" of the long-term SST trends to the detriment of incorporating
eects of shorter time scales. A more focused feature-engineering module that
guided the data-length fed to the LSTM model may improve performance.
However, this contravenes the philosophy of RNN-type approaches that aims
to implicitly learn the nature of cyclic data. Another point worth noting is
that DL approaches have a larger appetite for training data than some of
the simpler models adopted. Some reduction in MAPE may be possible by
extending the size of the training data. Again, however, when evaluating
dierent modelling approaches, aspects such as computational complexity and
ability to learn on smaller datasets are key points that demand consideration
(further, there are practical limits on amount of available data).
This study considered a framework to develop a transportable model
suite applied to a nonlinear, real-world dataset. Key points considered were
design of an automatic feature-engineering module, which, together with a
standard hyperparameter optimisation routine, facilitated ready deployment
at disparate geographical locations. Results demonstrated that the dierent
models adopted had inherent characteristics that governed accuracy and level
of regularisation or overt to training data.
We compared performance of ML models with a state-of-the-art physics-
based approach from ECMWF. As expected, the physics-based model provided
close agreement with satellite measurements { the ECMWF prediction is a
reanalysis product which assimilates measurement (including satellite) data
daily to update the accuracy of the product. This study demonstrated, how-
ever, that the machine learning based approaches achieve accuracy comparable
to ECMWF model, at a fraction of the computational expense. Aggregating
the models improved the robustness of this approach and served to regularise
small-scale uctuations or seasonal biases in individual models. Figure 6
compares the ensemble predictions to the ECMWF results, satellite measured
SST and predictions from selected ML model at four locations across the globe
(location details provided in Figure 4 and Table 4). The four plots illustrate
the varying temporal characteristics of SST data at dierent geographical
points and the performance of ML models to capture those characteristics.
Generally the models are seen to capture both the seasonal patterns and
shorter-scale uctuations (e.g. unseasonably warm autumn temperatures at
location [0, -150]). Individual model prediction (green line) provides good pre-
dictive skill comparable to ECMWF, while the aggregated model is `smoother'
25
(possibly more robust to short-scale uctuations), while achieving comparable
accuracy.
Figure 6: Time series plots comparing the performance of individual model (green line)
and weighted ensemble average of GAM, RF, XGBoost, and MLP models (orange line)
against 1) ECMWF model estimate at nearest grid cell (red line) and 2) SST test data from
MODIS satellite (blue circles). The location of the four points considered are illustrated
in Figure 4 and described in more detail in Table 4 (note that subgure title denote the
latitude and longitude coordinates). For each of the four plots the orange line presents a
dierent model to provide an illustration of dierent model characteristics, namely (from
top-left) GAM, RF, XGBoost and MLP.
Classical works on ensemble forecasting demonstrated that the ensemble
mean should give a better forecast than a single deterministic forecast [ 51,52].
Assigning inverse MAPE weights to individual models provides a simple
and eective method to rank model contributions based on performance.
To illustrate forecast skill of dierent models, Table 4 presents MAE and
MAPE for each individual model, an ensemble model aggregation, and the
ECMWF estimate against MODIS measurements for the locations plotted in
Figure 6. Results demonstrate that the variation in error of individual models
26
Table 4: MAE (top table) and MAPE (bottom table) for individual models and ensemble
average of all models (GAM, RF, XGBoost, and MLP) for the selected number of locations
presented in Figure 6 . Forecast skill of ECMWF model also presented for illustrative
purposes.
Lat Lon GAM RF XGBoost MLP Ens. Ave. ECMWF
0 -150 0.41 0.44 0.43 0.42 0.38 0.33
-42 6 0.6 0.73 0.88 0.7 0.67 0.63
-12 60 0.48 0.49 0.55 0.50 0.45 0.37
42 156 1.96 1.31 1.53 1.09 1.16 1.03
MAPE
0 -150 1.52 1.64 1.61 1.58 1.42 1.27
-42 6 5.38 6.80 8.0 6.52 6.16 5.78
-12 60 1.77 1.79 2.01 1.86 1.66 1.38
42 156 12.5 8.27 10.4 7.26 7.56 6.62
can be "regularised" by the ensemble approach. We observe that individual
models perform better at dierent locations (e.g. GAM performs best at
location [-42,6], while MLP performs best at [42, 156]), illustrating the concept
of the "no free lunch" - no single machine learning algorithm necessarily
outperforms all others and one must select the appropriate algorithm for the
problem. However, the ensemble averaging approach outperforms individual
models providing a framework to improve average predictive skill. The low
computational cost of prediction enabled by machine learning is particularly
amenable to ensemble modelling approaches where multiple models can be
readily deployed [47, 48].
Interrogating temporal evolution of model error over the 18-month test pe-
riod demonstrated some biases in individual models e.g. GAM outperformed
RF during the summer period but is signicantly poorer during periods of
lower temperature. The ensemble aggregation framework we implemented
reduced error over the duration of the test period compared to arbitrarily
selected individual models, but more importantly, also served to reduce error
and biases at distinct periods of the prediction window. Table 5 presents sea-
sonal MSE against satellite data for each individual model and the ensemble
aggregation over the duration of the study period averaged over the same
locations as Figure 6.
27
Table 5: Seasonal MSE for individual models and ensemble average
Season GAM RF XGBoost MLP Ens. Ave.
Spring 1.37 1.04 1.01 0.90 0.94
Summer 0.18 0.40 0.45 0.68 0.30
Autumn 0.06 0.10 0.40 0.80 0.17
Winter 0.26 0.14 0.39 0.34 0.22
This study presented a time-series forecasting framework applied to satel-
lite measurement of SST. We considered the SST data as a set of disparate
points. In reality, the ocean surface more closely resembles an image with
interaction between neighbouring points. Results demonstrated that treating
the data as distinct time-series points provided good results. However, scope
exists to combine this approach with image-processing techniques such as
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to incorporate neighbouring eects
into predictions. Future work will explore the viability and value of combining
CNNs with time-series forecasting models to further improve the robustness
of the framework.
6. Conclusions
This paper demonstrates the viability of applying ML based approaches, ad-
dressing transportability, biases and robustness by combining feature selection
and disparate models with specic characteristics in a weighted aggregation
based on average model performance. This study aimed to assess the ability of
data-driven approaches to accurately predict SST characterised by seasonal
patterns, temporal dependencies and short-term uctuations. Results demon-
strate comparable performance to physics-based model simulations with low
computational cost, and which is easily parametrised to other geographical
locations. The low computational cost of the approach has many advantages.
First, it enables separation of SST forecasting models from HPC centres {
the suite of models presented here can be trained on a laptop and applied
to any geographic location. Once trained, the inference step is of negligible
computational expense and can be readily deployed on edge-type devices
(e.g. in-situ devices deployed in the ocean). Deploying large-scale models
is a complex task highly dependent on user skill to correctly congure and
parametrise to specic locations. Data-driven approaches can present an
28
alternative approach that enables rapid prediction, contingent on availability
of sucient data.
Acknowledgements
This project has received funding from the European Unions Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme as part of the RIA GAIN project under
grant agreement No. 773330.
29
References
[1]F. O'Donncha, J. Grant, Precision aquaculture, IEEE Internet of Things
Magazine 2 (2019) 26{30.
[2]S.-J. Huang, J.-T. Lin, Y.-T. Lo, N.-J. Kuo, C.-R. Ho, The coastal sea
surface temperature changes near the nuclear power plants of northern
Taiwan observed from satellite images, in: OCEANS 2014 - TAIPEI,
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1{5. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
6964547/ . doi: 10.1109/OCEANS-TAIPEI.2014.6964547 .
[3]T. Bayr, C. Wengel, M. Latif, D. Dommenget, J. L ubbecke, W. Park,
Error compensation of enso atmospheric feedbacks in climate models and
its inuence on simulated enso dynamics, Climate dynamics 53 (2019)
155{172.
[4]S. Hirahara, M. A. Balmaseda, E. De Boisseson, H. Hersbach, 26 Sea Sur-
face Temperature and Sea Ice Concentration for ERA5, Technical Report,
Reading, UK, 2016. URL: http://old.ecmwf.int/publications/ .
[5]M. Bell, A. Schiller, P.-Y. Le Traon, N. Smith, E. Dombrowsky,
K. Wilmer-Becker, An introduction to GODAE OceanView, Jour-
nal of Operational Oceanography 8 (2015) s2{s11. URL: http://
www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1755876X.2015.1022041 .
doi:10.1080/1755876X.2015.1022041 .
[6]F. Rawlins, S. Ballard, K. Bovis, A. Clayton, D. Li, G. Inverarity,
A. Lorenc, T. Payne, The met oce global four-dimensional variational
data assimilation scheme, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological
Society 133 (2007) 347{362.
[7]T. Hey, S. Tansley, K. Tolle, et al., The fourth paradigm: data-intensive
scientic discovery, volume 1, Microsoft research Redmond, WA, 2009.
[8]E. J. O'Dea, A. K. Arnold, K. P. Edwards, R. Furner, P. Hyder, M. J. Mar-
tin, J. R. Siddorn, D. Storkey, J. While, J. T. Holt, H. Liu, An operational
ocean forecast system incorporating NEMO and SST data assimilation
for the tidally driven European North-West shelf, Journal of Operational
Oceanography 5 (2012) 3{17. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/full/10.1080/1755876X.2012.11020128 . doi: 10.1080/1755876X.
2012.11020128 .
30
[9]S. Saha, S. Moorthi, X. Wu, J. Wang, S. Nadiga, P. Tripp, D. Behringer,
Y.-T. Hou, H.-y. Chuang, M. Iredell, M. Ek, J. Meng, R. Yang, M. P.
Mendez, H. van den Dool, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, M. Chen, E. Becker,
S. Saha, S. Moorthi, X. Wu, J. Wang, S. Nadiga, P. Tripp, D. Behringer,
Y.-T. Hou, H.-y. Chuang, M. Iredell, M. Ek, J. Meng, R. Yang, M. P.
Mendez, H. van den Dool, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, M. Chen, E. Becker,
The NCEP Climate Forecast System Version 2, Journal of Climate 27
(2014) 2185{2208. URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.
1175/JCLI-D-12-00823.1 . doi: 10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00823.1 .
[10]E. Chassignet, H. Hurlburt, E. J. Metzger, O. Smedstad, J. Cummings,
G. Halliwell, R. Bleck, R. Baraille, A. Wallcraft, C. Lozano, H. Tolman,
A. Srinivasan, S. Hankin, P. Cornillon, R. Weisberg, A. Barth, R. He,
F. Werner, J. Wilkin, US GODAE: Global Ocean Prediction with
the HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM), Oceanography 22
(2009) 64{75. URL: https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/
a504037.pdf . doi: 10.5670/oceanog.2009.39 .
[11]Y. Chao, Z. Li, J. Farrara, J. C. McWilliams, J. Bellingham, X. Capet,
F. Chavez, J.-K. Choi, R. Davis, J. Doyle, P. Li, P. Marchesiello,
M. A. Moline, J. Paduan, S. Ramp, Development, implementation
and evaluation of a data-assimilative ocean forecasting system o the
central California coast, Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in
Oceanography 56 (2009) 100{126. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0967064508002622 . doi: 10.1016/J.DSR2.
2008.08.011 .
[12]D. B. Haidvogel, H. Arango, W. P. Budgell, B. D. Cornuelle, E. Curchitser,
E. Di Lorenzo, K. Fennel, W. R. Geyer, A. J. Hermann, L. Lanerolle,
Others, Ocean forecasting in terrain-following coordinates: Formulation
and skill assessment of the Regional Ocean Modeling System, Journal of
Computational Physics 227 (2008) 3595{3624.
[13]F. O'Donncha, M. Hartnett, S. Nash, L. Ren, E. Ragnoli, Character-
izing observed circulation patterns within a bay using fHFgradar and
numerical model simulations, Journal of Marine Systems 142 (2015)
96{110.
[14]E. de Bezenac, A. Pajot, P. Gallinari, Deep Learning for Physical
Processes: Incorporating Prior Scientic Knowledge, arxiv preprint
31
arXiv:1711.07970 (2017). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.07970 .
arXiv:1711.07970 .
[15]S. Wiewel, M. Becher, N. Thuerey, Latent-space Physics: Towards
Learning the Temporal Evolution of Fluid Flow, arxiv preprint
arXiv:1802.10123 (2018). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.10123 .
arXiv:1802.10123 .
[16]D. J. Lary, A. H. Alavi, A. H. Gandomi, A. L. Walker, Machine learning
in geosciences and remote sensing, Geoscience Frontiers 7 (2016) 3{10.
[17]S. C. James, Y. Zhang, F. O'Donncha, A machine learning frame-
work to forecast wave conditions, Coastal Engineering 137 (2018) 1{
10. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0378383917304969 . doi: 10.1016/J.COASTALENG.2018.03.004 .
[18]P. H ahnel, J. Mare cek, J. Monteil, F. O'Donncha, Using deep learning
to extend the range of air pollution monitoring and forecasting, Journal
of Computational Physics 408 (2020) 109278.
[19]P. M. R. DeVries, T. B. Thompson, B. J. Meade, Enabling large-scale
viscoelastic calculations via neural network acceleration, Geophysical
Research Letters 44 (2017) 2662{2669. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/
10.1002/2017GL072716 . doi: 10.1002/2017GL072716 .
[20]E. Arandia, F. O'Donncha, S. McKenna, S. Tirupathi, E. Ragnoli,
Surrogate modeling and risk-based analysis for solute transport simula-
tions, Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment (2018) 1{
15. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00477-018-1549-6 .
doi:10.1007/s00477-018-1549-6 .
[21]J. Li, A. D. Heap, A. Potter, J. J. Daniell, Application
of machine learning methods to spatial interpolation of envi-
ronmental variables, Environmental Modelling & Software 26
(2011) 1647{1659. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364815211001654 . doi: 10.1016/J.ENVSOFT.2011.07.
004.
[22]A. Ducournau, R. Fablet, Deep learning for ocean remote sensing:
an application of convolutional neural networks for super-resolution
32
on satellite-derived SST data, in: 2016 9th IAPR Workshop on
Pattern Recogniton in Remote Sensing (PRRS), IEEE, 2016, pp. 1{
6. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7867019/ . doi: 10.
1109/PRRS.2016.7867019 .
[23]B. Gokaraju, S. S. Durbha, R. L. King, N. H. Younan, A Machine
Learning Based Spatio-Temporal Data Mining Approach for Detection of
Harmful Algal Blooms in the Gulf of Mexico, IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 4 (2011) 710{
720. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5701668/ . doi: 10.
1109/JSTARS.2010.2103927 .
[24]D. H. Wolpert, W. G. Macready, No free lunch theorems for optimization,
IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation 1 (1997) 67{82.
[25]T. J. Hastie, R. J. Tibshirani, Generalized Additive Models., CRC
Press, 1990. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
1002/9781118445112.stat03141 .
[26]T. K. Wijaya, M. Sinn, B. Chen, Forecasting Uncertainty in Electricity
Demand, in: Workshops at the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on
Articial Intelligence, 2015. URL: https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.
php/WS/AAAIW15/paper/viewPaper/10104 .
[27]J. Friedman, T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, The elements of statistical learning,
10, Springer series in statistics New York, 2001.
[28]L. Breiman, Random Forests, Machine Learning 45 (2001) 5{32.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1023/A:1010933404324 . doi: 10.
1023/A:1010933404324 .
[29]A.-L. Boulesteix, S. Janitza, J. Kruppa, I. R. K onig, Overview of random
forest methodology and practical guidance with emphasis on computa-
tional biology and bioinformatics, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery 2 (2012) 493{507.
[30]P. Probst, M. N. Wright, A.-L. Boulesteix, Hyperparameters and tuning
strategies for random forest, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery 9 (2019) e1301.
33
[31]T. Chen, C. Guestrin, XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boost-
ing System, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD In-
ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing - KDD '16, ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 2016,
pp. 785{794. URL: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2939672.
2939785 . doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939785 .
[32]V. Nair, G. E. Hinton, Rectied linear units improve restricted boltzmann
machines, in: Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine
learning (ICML-10), 2010, pp. 807{814.
[33]I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, Deep learning, 2015. URL: https:
//www.deeplearningbook.org/ .
[34]A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, G. Hinton, Speech recognition with
deep recurrent neural networks, in: 2013 IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, IEEE, 2013, pp.
6645{6649. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6638947/ .
doi:10.1109/ICASSP.2013.6638947 .
[35]F. Gers, Learning to forget: continual prediction with LSTM, in: 9th
International Conference on Articial Neural Networks: ICANN '99, vol-
ume 1999, IEE, 1999, pp. 850{855. URL: http://digital-library.
theiet.org/content/conferences/10.1049/cp{_}19991218 . doi: 10.
1049/cp:19991218 .
[36]X. Shi, Z. Chen, H. Wang, D.-Y. Yeung, W.-k. Wong, W.-c. WOO, Convo-
lutional LSTM Network: A Machine Learning Approach for Precipitation
Nowcasting, 2015.
[37]L. Buitinck, G. Louppe, M. Blondel, F. Pedregosa, A. Mueller, O. Grisel,
V. Niculae, P. Prettenhofer, A. Gramfort, J. Grobler, R. Layton, J. Van-
derPlas, A. Joly, B. Holt, G. Varoquaux, API design for machine learning
software: experiences from the scikit-learn project, in: ECML PKDD
Workshop: Languages for Data Mining and Machine Learning, 2013, pp.
108{122.
[38]I. Guyon, S. Gunn, M. Nikravesh, L. A. Zadeh, Feature extraction:
foundations and applications, volume 207, Springer, 2008.
34
[39]Ocean Biology Processing Group, MODIS Aqua Level 3
SST Thermal IR Daily 4km Daytime v2014.0, 2015. URL:
https://podaac.jpl.nasa.gov/dataset/MODIS_AQUA_L3_SST_
THERMAL_DAILY_4KM_DAYTIME_V2014.0 . doi: 10.5067/MODSA-MO4D4 .
[40]K. Kilpatrick, G. Podest a, S. Walsh, E. Williams, V. Halliwell, M. Szc-
zodrak, O. Brown, P. Minnett, R. Evans, A decade of sea sur-
face temperature from MODIS, Remote Sensing of Environment
165 (2015) 27{41. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0034425715001650 . doi: 10.1016/J.RSE.2015.04.023 .
[41]IBM, Weather Company Data API, Technical Report, The Weather
Company, 2018. URL: https://www.ibm.com/us-en/marketplace/
weather-company-data-packages/details . doi: i126-7492-08 .
[42]The Weather Company, Cleaned Observations API Documentation,
Technical Report, TWC, 2018. URL: http://cleanedobservations.
wsi.com/documents/WSI%20Cleaned%20Observations%20API%
20Documentation.pdf .
[43]E. N. Lorenz, Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow, Journal of the At-
mospheric Sciences 20 (1963) 130{141. doi: 10.1175/1520-0469(1963)
020<0130:DNF>2.0.CO;2 .
[44]D. Servn, C. Brummitt, pygam: Generalized additive models in python,
2018. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1208723 . doi: 10.5281/
zenodo.1208723 .
[45] F. Chollet, et al., Keras, https://keras.io , 2015.
[46]R. Adhikari, R. K. Agrawal, Combining multiple time series models
through a robust weighted mechanism, in: 2012 1st International Con-
ference on Recent Advances in Information Technology (RAIT), 2012,
pp. 455{460. doi: 10.1109/RAIT.2012.6194621 .
[47]F. O'Donncha, Y. Zhang, B. Chen, S. C. James, An integrated framework
that combines machine learning and numerical models to improve wave-
condition forecasts, Journal of Marine Systems 186 (2018) 29{36.
35
[48]F. ODonncha, Y. Zhang, B. Chen, S. C. James, Ensemble model aggre-
gation using a computationally lightweight machine-learning model to
forecast ocean waves, Journal of Marine Systems 199 (2019) 103206.
[49]J. Ruiz-Arias, J. Dudhia, C. Gueymard, D. Pozo-V azquez, Assessment
of the level-3 modis daily aerosol optical depth in the context of surface
solar radiation and numerical weather modeling, Atmos. Chem. Phys 13
(2013) 675{692.
[50]A. G. O'Carroll, E. M. Armstrong, H. Beggs, M. Bouali, K. S. Casey,
G. K. Corlett, P. Dash, C. Donlon, C. L. Gentemann, J. L. Hyer, et al.,
Observational needs of sea surface temperature, Frontiers in Marine
Science 6 (2019) 420.
[51]E. S. Epstein, Stochastic dynamic prediction, Tellus 21 (1969) 739{759.
[52]C. Leith, Theoretical skill of monte carlo forecasts, Monthly Weather
Review 102 (1974) 409{418.
36
