Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
OceanNet: A principled neural operator-based
digital twin for regional oceans
Ashesh Chattopadhyay1*, Michael Gray2, Tianning
Wu2, Anna B. Lowe2and Ruoying He2*
1*Applied Mathematics, University of California, Santa Cruz,
Santa Cruz, 95060, California, United States.
2Marine, Earth & Atmospheric Sciences, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, 27695, North Carolina, United States.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): aschatto@ucsc.edu;
rhe@ncsu.edu;
Contributing authors: magray@ncsu.edu; twu27@ncsu.edu;
ablowe@ncsu.edu;
Abstract
While data-driven approaches demonstrate great potential in atmo-
spheric modeling and weather forecasting, ocean modeling poses dis-
tinct challenges due to complex bathymetry, land, vertical structure,
and flow non-linearity. This study introduces OceanNet, a principled
neural operator-based digital twin for regional sea-suface height emula-
tion. OceanNet uses a Fourier neural operator and predictor-evaluate-
corrector integration scheme to mitigate autoregressive error growth
and enhance stability over extended time scales. A spectral regular-
izer counteracts spectral bias at smaller scales. OceanNet is applied
to the northwest Atlantic Ocean western boundary current (the Gulf
Stream), focusing on the task of seasonal prediction for Loop Cur-
rent eddies and the Gulf Stream meander. Trained using historical
sea surface height (SSH) data, OceanNet demonstrates competitive
forecast skill compared to a state-of-the-art dynamical ocean model fore-
cast, reducing computation by 500,000 times. These accomplishments
demonstrate initial steps for physics-inspired deep neural operators as
cost-effective alternatives to high-resolution numerical ocean models.
Keywords: Data-driven model, ocean forecasting, neural operator, spectral
bias
1arXiv:2310.00813v2  [cs.LG]  4 Sep 2024
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
2 Article Title
1 Introduction
An essential component of the Earth’s ocean circulation is the northern
Atlantic Ocean’s western boundary current (WBC) system, which includes
the Loop Current (LC), Loop Current eddies (LCE), the Gulf Stream (GS),
and Gulf Stream meander (GSM). The WBC plays a critical role in the
transport of heat, salt, and nutrients, and strongly influences global weather,
climate, and marine ecosystems. Recent studies have shown the promise of
using data-driven approaches to model and predict atmospheric circulation,
but complexities in the ocean system present additional challenges when build-
ing data-driven models [1–3]. One challenge is the complex land boundaries,
such as in the Gulf of Mexico (GoM). Equally difficult to model, the GS fre-
quently sheds eddies as a result of nonlinear flow and the interactions of cool,
subpolar circulation from the north and warm, subtropical circulation from
the south. Predicting LCEs in the GoM and GS meander and eddy separation
have been long-standing challenges for numerical ocean models [4–6]. The sep-
aration mechanism involves nonlinear barotropic and baroclinic instabilities of
ocean currents, complex flow-topography interactions, and, in the case of the
GS, interaction with the Deep Western Boundary Current [7–10]. These chal-
lenging features require carefully calibrated, high-resolution numerical models
and tremendous computing resources to resolve [11–13].
Recent efforts in emulating ocean dynamics with deep learning-based
approaches have primarily focused on predicting large-scale circulation fea-
tures, such as those resolved by empirical orthogonal functions (EOFs) [14] or
on constructing low-dimensional representations [15]. However, there has yet
to be a comprehensive data-driven model for the ocean akin to those used in
global atmospheric modeling.
Data-driven modeling in Earth sciences has focused on predicting global
atmospheric dynamics [1–3, 16, 17]; weather prediction has been used as a
benchmark. The primary advantage of data-driven models lies in their com-
putational efficiency, enabling the execution of a large number of ensembles.
This facilitates seamless and efficient data assimilation leading to improved
estimates of extreme weather events. Several recent studies [1–3] have demon-
strated that these data-driven models can achieve accuracy comparable to, and
often surpassing, state-of-the-art numerical weather prediction models such
as the Integrated Forecasting System (IFS), at a significantly reduced com-
putational cost. This achievement holds substantial promise for incorporating
deep learning-based data-driven models into the suite of operational weather
forecasting models.
A significant limitation of these models arises when they are integrated
over longer time scales ( ≥2 weeks), leading to instability and the emergence
of nonphysical features (see Fig. 1 in Chattopadhyay et al. [18]). The cause
of this instability was identified as “spectral bias” [18], an inductive bias in
alldeep neural networks that hinders their ability to capture small-scale fea-
tures in turbulent flows. A potential solution was proposed in [18] in the form
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Article Title 3
of a framework to construct long-term stable digital twins for atmospheric
dynamics.
Research into data-driven digital twins for both global and regional ocean
modeling is still in its infancy and has not been explored to the same extent
as in atmospheric modeling. The development of long-term stable, accurate
data-driven ocean models that maintain computational efficiency is essential
for realizing data-driven digital twins for the entire Earth system.
We present here a principled neural operator-based digital twin to pre-
dict the sea-surface height (SSH) of the northwest Atlantic Ocean’s western
boundary current, built upon the same principles as the FouRK model intro-
duced in Chattopadhyay et al. [18]. The proposed model, OceanNet, relies
on a Fourier neural operator (FNO), which incorporates a predictor-evaluate-
corrector (PEC) integration scheme to suppress autoregressive error growth.
Additionally, a spectral regularizer is employed to mitigate spectral bias at
small scales.
OceanNet is trained on historical SSH data from a high-resolution north-
west Atlantic Ocean reanalysis and demonstrates long-term stability and com-
petitive skills. It remains competitive with SSH prediction made by a regional
ocean dynamical prediction that is based on the state-of-the-art Regional
Ocean Modeling System (ROMS) while maintaining a computational cost that
is 500,000 cheaper. While OceanNet only emulates high-resolution SSH fields
for the regional ocean, future work incorporating other key variables in ocean
dynamics would underscores the potential of structured, physics-inspired deep
neural operators as a cost-effective alternative to computationally expensive
high-resolution numerical models.
2 Results
Mesoscale ocean circulation dynamics can be well represented by the spatio-
temporal evolution of SSH fields. In this section we conduct a comprehensive
comparison of SSH predictions generated by OceanNet and the regional ocean
dynamical model forecast with independent reanalysis data. To assess the per-
formance rigorously, we employ both qualitative and quantitative measures.
The metrics for evaluating predictive accuracy of SSH include root mean
squared error (RMSE) and correlation coefficient (CC), which are widely rec-
ognized and employed in forecasting [1–3, 18]. In addition, we incorporate a
specialized object-tracking metric to evaluate the prediction of major ocean
features delineated by SSH contours: the modified Hausdorff distance (MHD,
[19]). MHD quantifies the comparison of predicted eddy/meander structures
to their counterparts in the reanalysis data; identical shapes at the same time
instant have an MHD of zero. To provide a comprehensive assessment, we also
present qualitative snapshots of the predicted SSH fields generated by Ocean-
Net, regional ocean dynamical forecast, and the independent SSH field derived
from the reanalysis.
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
4 Article Title
Fig. 1 The domain for the reanalysis data covering the northwestern Atlantic (a). The two
subdomains used to develop OceanNet, specifically (b) the GS separation from the central
US east coast to 60◦W and (c) the LC eddy-shedding region in the eastern GoM, extending
from 92◦W into the Atlantic 75◦W. The mean SSH from from 1993-2020 in the reanalysis
data is shown in (a), while (b) and (c) depict daily mean SSH on May 1, 2019, and July 10,
2019, respectively. All three domains share the same color scale.
2.1 Performance of OceanNet in the GoM
We present an evaluation of OceanNet’s seasonal (up to 120 days) forecasting
performance compared to that of a regional ocean dynamical model forecast
for two major GoM LCE shedding events: Eddy Sverdrup (Jul 2019-Jan 2020)
and Eddy Thor (Jan 2020 - Sep 2020). The target LC dynamics, represented
by spatio-temporal evolutions of SSH, are from the reanalysis dataset. Specifics
regarding the generation and structure of the reanalysis dataset are covered in
section 4.1.
A qualitative assessment (Fig. 2) reveals that OceanNet performs relatively
well in terms of maintaining the general physical consistency of the emula-
tion of the ocean dynamics. However, there are certain cases, where ROMS
does signficantly better than OceanNet. For example, the eddy configuration
in September 29, 2019, OceanNet predictions of the eddy diffuses quickly while
ROMs maintains the strength of the eddies. However, e.g., the eddy cofigura-
tion of Aug 30, 2019, is better captured by OceanNet, while ROMs predicts an
unphysical low-pressure region just off the coast. Generally for the GoM region,
both RMSE and CC for OceanNet and ROMs is roughly the same, while the
eddy shape is better captured by OceanNet as revealed by the MHD. Ocean-
Net, however, maintains both stability and physical consistency for at least
120 days. For this domain, OceanNet is trained with a 5-day lead, consistent
with the LC and LCE evolution timescale. ROMS based regional dynamical
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Article Title 5
Fig. 2 Prediction performance of OceanNet. (a) SSH fields from the ocean reanalysis. (b) Predicted SSH generated by the OceanNet. (c) regional
ocean dynamical model forecasts. Each row in the OceanNet and dynamical model predictions was initialized with the corresponding reanalysis data in
the left column. The predictions display SSH forecasts for 30, 60, and 90 days. To evaluate the predictions, we can examine a diagonal comparison with
the reanalysis SSH, as indicated by the black arrows in (b). The same diagonal comparison can be conducted with the ocean reanalysis data for (c).
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
6 Article Title
Fig. 3 OceanNet performance metrics in the GoM: RMSE (a-c), CC (d-f), and MHD (g-
i). In the left column, probability density functions (PDFs) are presented for 1,000 random
pairs sourced from the training data spanning 1993-2018 (means shown by black horizontal
lines). The performance statistics, calculated based on forecasts of 0-120 days for eddies Sver-
drup (middle column) and Thor (right column), are displayed as mean values (lines) with
standard deviations (shading). The black horizontal dashed lines in these columns denote
saturation values determined as 95% of the means derived from the random pairs. In the
middle and right columns, solid blue lines are OceanNet, dashed red lines are the regional
ocean dynamical forecast model, and gray dots are persistence. These representations illus-
trate how each method’s statistics compare with the target SSH from the reanalysis dataset.
The shading is obtained from the standard deviation due to the choice of different initial
conditions to evluate the forecast skill.
model predictions were initialized five days apart to allow for fair comparisons
between the two models. OceanNet predictions have a “wall-clock” execution
time of microseconds, approximately 500,000 times faster than regional dynam-
ical model forecasts. So, while ROMS, in this case, is just as accurate or even
better for some of the eddy shedding cases, the computational advantage of
OceanNet is undeniable.
An examination of RMSE, CC, and MHD for SSH, over a 120-day period
(Fig. 3) demonstrates that OceanNet is competitive with regional dynamical
model forecasts, and outperforms random predictions (indicated by the hori-
zontal dashed lines). These random predictions are derived from 1,000 random
pairs of samples from the training data covering the period of 1993-2018 to cal-
culate the saturation values, which quantify the intrinsic predictability of the
ocean system [20–22]. RMSE values above random predictions indicate that the
model has lost all short-term forecasting skill, as is obvious for chaotic dynam-
ical systems. Beyond 100 days, ROMs clearly show an improvement in the
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Article Title 7
RMSE (CC) values as compared to OceanNet, however those values are higher
(lower) than the saturation values and hence do not provide any insights into
predictive performance. Comparing OceanNet and regional dynamical model
with persistence forecasting, we see that regional dynamical model suffers from
inaccuracies in predicting the timing and configuration of the eddy-shedding
and reattachment process, and thus underperforms persistence forecast on
several occasions.
We conducted a further comparison (Supplementary Information) of
OceanNet with previous deep learning-based models that have been success-
fully used in weather prediction, such as the model introduced by Weyn et
al. [23]. The spectral characteristics of these models exhibit deviations in the
high wavenumbers, rendering their predictions nonphysical beyond a 2-week
forecasting horizon (Fig. S1). A geostrophic constraint within the loss function
was also tested (Fig. S2), but OceanNet in its current design performed better.
2.2 Performance of OceanNet in the North Atlantic GS
Region
We present qualitative and quantitative evaluations of OceanNet’s forecasting
performance compared to the regional ocean dynamical model forecast for
GSM in the northwest Atlantic. OceanNet was specifically trained for this
domain with a lead time of 4 days to resolve the evolution of the northern
boundary of the GS. To ensure alignment with the initialization dates for
regional ocean model (which were separated by 5 days), we show the 20th, 40th,
and 60th-day forecasts, as opposed to the 30th, 60th, and 90th-day forecasts
used for the LC.
A qualitative assessment reveals that OceanNet effectively captures the
SSH propagation of undulations in the northern boundary of the GS. However,
in certain instances it fails to skillfully captures large-scale eddies and travel-
ing into and out of the domain; this can be attributed to the absence of lateral
boundary conditions. (Fig. 4). The predictions of OceanNet are also signfi-
cantly more diffusive than reanalysis which suggests that OceanNet cannot
with just a single variable capture the correct climatology and variability for
decadal simulations. The dynamical model forecast also tends to overpredict
extreme values of SSH and the meridional amplitude of the northern boundary.
While it is sensitive to initial conditions, OceanNet remains physically con-
sistent over 120-day forecasts in this region as well. As observed in the GoM,
OceanNet provides stable and physically reasonable SSH predictions for the
GSM for at least 120 days (not shown for brevity).
Similar to the GoM, OceanNet consistently outperforms regional ocean
dynamical model in RMSE, CC, and MHD computed between the predicted
SSH values and the reanalysis SSH over 120 days (Fig. 5). Persistence fore-
casting also fares reasonably well in this region due to the background state of
the GSM; however, OceanNet still outperforms persistence in all three metrics
over 120 days.
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
8 Article Title
Fig. 4 Performance of OceanNet for GS prediction. (a) SSH fields from the ocean reanalysis. (b) Predicted SSH generated by OceanNet. (c) Regional
ocean dynamical model forecasts. In both OceanNet and dynamical model predictions, each row was initialized with the corresponding reanalysis data
in the left column. SSH forecasts are provided for 20, 40, and 60 days. To evaluate the predictions, we can perform a diagonal comparison with the
reanalysis SSH, as indicated by the black arrows in (b). The same diagonal comparison can also be conducted with the ocean reanalysis data for (c).
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Article Title 9
Fig. 5 OceanNet’s performance metrics in the northwest Atlantic: RMSE (top), CC (mid-
dle), and MHD (bottom), compared to the persistence forecast and regional ocean dynamical
model forecast. In the left column, probability density functions (PDFs) are presented,
derived from 1,000 random pairs sourced from the training data spanning 1993-2018 (means
shown by black horizontal lines). The performance statistics, calculated based on forecasts
of 0-120 days, are displayed as mean values (lines) with standard deviations (shading). The
black horizontal dashed lines denote saturation values, which are determined as 95% of the
means derived from the random pairs. Solid blue lines are OceanNet, dashed red lines are
the regional ocean dynamical forecast model, and gray dots are persistence. These repre-
sentations illustrate how each method’s statistics compare with the target SSH from the
reanalysis dataset. The shading is obtained from the standard deviation due to the choice
of different initial conditions to evluate the forecast skill.
3 Discussion
In this study, we introduce OceanNet, a deep neural operator, with princi-
pled design structures within the architecture, to function as a digital twin for
long-term (up to 120 days) mesoscale ocean circulation forecasting. Our major
technical contributions encompass the development of an FNO and the appli-
cation of a PEC-based convergent integration scheme, along with a spectral
regularizer. Together, these techniques mitigate autoregressive error growth
and the small-scale spectral bias frequently observed in data-driven models of
multi-scale dynamical systems.
By training the model on 26 years (1993-2018) of high-resolution regional
ocean reanalysis data for the northwest Atlantic, we evaluate OceanNet’s abil-
ity to predict mesoscale ocean processes such as the GoM LC eddy shedding
and GSM over a 90-120 day forecasting horizon. One major shortcoming of
OceanNet is the absence of lateral boundary conditions from the open ocean.
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
10 Article Title
However, since OceanNet is trained using more than two decades of ocean
reanalysis data, which considers open ocean processes and conditions, includ-
ing Rossby waves and ocean eddies propagating into the regional domain,
information about ocean boundaries may already embedded in the training
dataset. Furthermore, we focus on sub-seasonal to seasonal time scales (30-120
days) in the mid-latitude Atlantic Ocean. The propagation speed of Rossby
waves at 40 °N is approximately 1 cm/s. As a result, meanders and eddies
within our time scale of interest only travel 30-120 km from the open bound-
ary. With this limited travel distance, open ocean condition has a relative small
impact on the interior circulation predictions made by the machine learning
model. We acknowledge that for longer-term forecasting problems or regions
in lower latitudes (e.g., Rossby wave speed is 25 cm/s at 5 °N), having accu-
rate open boundary conditions will be crucial for model predictions, whether
it’s a dynamical model or a machine learning model.
Nevertheless, OceanNet demonstrates remarkable stability and consistently
competes with the regional ocean dynamical model forecast while being
500,000 times faster. These results demonstrate the potential of utilizing sci-
entific machine learning to develop long-term stable, and accurate data-driven
ocean models of great computational efficiency, paving the way for realizing a
data-driven digital twin encompassing the entire climate system.
Despite the promising forecast accuracy observed with reanalysis data, our
algorithm possesses several limitations. First, this study exclusively trained
and tested OceanNet using reanalysis data pertaining to mesoscale ocean
eddies and meanders. Real-world ocean forecasting systems operate with
dynamical ocean models and real-time ocean observational data, covering
dynamic processes across diverse spatial scales. The disparities between these
data sources and scales necessitate further investigation into OceanNet’s per-
formance across various ocean applications. Second, OceanNet’s focus is solely
on SSH. This study did not explore other ocean state variables, such as cur-
rents and temperature. The omission of these variables may restrict the model’s
capacity to accurately predict small-scale ocean circulation phenomena, such
as shelf break jets and frontal currents. Third, AI-based methods frequently
produce smoother forecast results than dynamical models, which can poten-
tially lead to an underestimation of the magnitudes of extreme ocean events.
Therefore, additional research is imperative to assess OceanNet’s performance
under extreme ocean conditions, e.g., during severe storms. Finally, while con-
trol simulations with OceanNet has been performed in this study, the behavior
of OceanNet to perturbations or forcings has not been considered. A physically-
consistent AI-based ocean model, akin to physics-based numerical models must
produce accurate response to forcings. In future studies, with several variables
incorporated into OceanNet, its response to external forcings would also be
compared to numerical models to establish physical consistency.
Significant opportunities exist for improvement in both AI-based methods
and dynamical model-based ocean forecasting. In the AI domain, potential
advancements involve the integration of subsurface ocean states and additional
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Article Title 11
ocean variables, the incorporation of temporal dimensions through the training
of four-dimensional deep networks, and the exploration of more complex net-
work architectures with increased depth and breadth. In the realm of numerical
ocean forecast modeling, the development of pre- and post-processing tech-
niques can help mitigate the inherent biases found in ocean models. We expect
that a hybrid approach, combining data-driven and dynamical numerical mod-
els will play a pivotal role in pushing the boundaries of excellence in ocean
prediction.
4 Data and Methods
4.1 Reanalysis Data
We utilized high-resolution northwest Atlantic regional ocean reanalysis data
to train OceanNet. This reanalysis was generated using a regional implemen-
tation of ROMS with the ensemble Kalman filter data assimilation method
(EnKF). It features a horizontal resolution of 4 km with 50 vertical layers. For
surface atmospheric forcing, we employed data from the European Center for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasting (ECMWF) Reanalysis v5 (ERA5), while
open boundary conditions were derived from the Copernicus Global Ocean
Physics Reanalysis (GLORYS). Ten major tidal constituents from the OSU
TPXO tide database were used. The model incorporated 120 river inputs,
sourced from the National Water Model and climatology datasets. The tempo-
ral scope of the reanalysis spans from January 1, 1993 to December 31, 2020,
with daily output.
The assimilated observations encompass a variety of sources, including
AVHRR and MODIS Terra sea surface temperature, AVISO along-track sea
surface height anomaly, glider temperature/salinity observations from the
Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS), and the EN4 dataset which
aggregates data from Argo floats, shipboard surveys, drifters, moorings, and
other sources. EnKF assimilates data with no influence or retainment of pre-
vious timesteps, as opposed to 3D/4D-var methods, which include forward
and backward passes over the results to ensure continuity. The resulting data
assimilative ocean reanalysis allows us to train OceanNet with a time-space
continuous SSH dataset with no external knowledge (as would be the case for
observations).
OceanNet is trained on 5-day mean SSH data with a 5-day lead time for the
GoM domain and 4-day lead time for the GSM domain. Both training datasets
consist of 26 years of reanalysis data from 1993 through 2018. SSH Forecasting
was conducted for 2019-2020. Further details on OceanNet’s training process
are provided in section 4.2.
4.2 OceanNet: Configuration and Design
The OceanNet model (Fig. 6) has three major components. the Fourier Neural
Operator (FNO), which is used to learn the residual, similar to Krishnapriyan
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
12 Article Title
Fig. 6 (a) A schematic of the OceanNet model. (b) The Fourier Neural Operator, depicted
asN. The neural operator uplifts the input state, X(t) to a high-dimensional space using
two convolutional layers. The uplifted state then undergoes a Fourier transform, subsequent
coarse-graining by removing the high-wavenumber modes, and then undergoes an inverse
Fourier transform. Finally a bias layer is also added to account for aperiodicity in the data.
Finally, two more convolutional layers are added to preserve the dimension of the final
output, X(t+k∆t). (c) 2-time-step training scheme. (d) The loss function used. Here, Xis
the state of the system that is predicted, and His the PEC-based convergent integration
scheme used.
et al. [24] and Chattopadhyay et al. [18]; the PEC integrator; and the spectral
regularizer, which alleviates spectral bias.
4.2.1 Fourier Neural Operator (FNO)
OceanNet is built upon the FNO [25]. Training utilizes labeled pairs of histor-
ical 5-day mean SSH data in the GoM (section 4.1), X(t) (input), X(t+ 5∆ t)
(label), and X(t+ 10∆ t) (label), where ∆ t= 1 day. For training OceanNet in
the northwest Atlantic region, the labels are X(t+ 4∆ t) and X(t+ 8∆ t). The
training assumes the governing partial differential equation for the reduced
ocean system involves ocean states X(t):
dX
dt=F(X(t)). (1)
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Article Title 13
To integrate the system from the initial condition, X(t), we represent
Eq. (1) in its discrete form:
X(t+ 5∆ t) =X(t) +Zt+5∆t
tF(X(t))dt|{z}
N[◦,θ]| {z }
H[◦]. (2)
Here,Nis an FNO that parameterizes Fwith four Fourier layers, similar to Li
et al. [25], each layer retaining 64 Fourier modes. θrepresents the ≈80×106
the trainable parameters of the FNO. His a higher-order predictor–evaluate–
corrector (PEC) integrator (section 4.2.2).
4.2.2 Predictor-Evaluate-Corrector Integration Scheme
Similar to the higher-order integration scheme in the form of fourth-order
Runge-Kutta (RK4) (Chattopadhyay et al. [18]), we implement a PEC scheme
in OceanNet, represented by the operator, H. The operations in Hare given
by:
i1=N[X(t), θ], (3a)
z=X(t) +N
X(t) +1
2i1, θ
. (3b)
The predicted state is given by z=H[N(X(t)), θ].
Although most of the higher-order integration schemes, including RK4,
demonstrate good performance for this problem, we have identified PEC as
the most effective choice. A theoretical study of the effect of each integration
scheme on the inductive bias of the trained Nis an active area of research [24],
especially for understanding the role it plays on the subsequent spectral bias
(section 4.2.3).
4.2.3 Fourier Regularizer and 2-time-step Loss Function
In OceanNet’s loss function, we incorporate a spectral regularizer based on
Fourier transforms introduced in Chattopadhyay et al. [18]. This is in addition
to the standard mean squared error loss (MSE) function, which is computed
exclusively for grid points located over the ocean.
The spectral regularizer penalizes deviations in the absolute value of the
latitude-averaged zonal Fourier spectrum (Fourier spectrum from now on) of
the SSH field at small wavenumbers. Such deviations arise due to spectral
bias [18, 26], which represents an inherent inductive bias in deep neural net-
works. This bias is responsible for their limitations in learning the fine-scale
dynamics of turbulent flow.
Furthermore, the combined loss function, which integrates both MSE and
the spectral regularizer is evaluated over two time steps, namely t+5∆t(t+4∆t
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
14 Article Title
for GS) and t+ 10∆ t(t+ 8∆ tfor GS), to extend the stability horizon. This
two-time-step loss function had remarkable success in the weather prediction
model, FourCastNet [1]. The spectral regularizers for time t+5∆tandt+10∆ t
are defined as follows:
µ(t+ 5∆ t, θ) =t=TX
t=0bX(t+ 5∆ t)
kx≥kT−bH[N(X(t), θ)]
kx≥kT2
2.(4)
µ(t+ 10∆ t, θ) =t=TX
t=0bX(t+ 10∆ t)
kx≥kT−bH[H[N(X(t), θ)]]
kx≥kT2
2.
(5)
Here, theˆ[◦] operator is the latitude-averaged zonal Fourier transform of
both the predicted and the target SSH fields. kTis a cutoff wavenumber chosen
to be 100 after significant trial and error. The loss functions for t+ 5∆ tand
t+ 10∆ tare given by L(t+ 5∆ t, θ):
L(t+ 5∆ t, θ) =t=TX
t=0∥X(t+ 5∆ t)−H[N(X(t), θ)]∥2
2+λµ(t+ 5∆ t, θ).(6)
L(t+ 10∆ t, θ) =t=TX
t=0∥X(t+ 10∆ t)−H[H[N(X(t), θ)]]∥2
2+λµ(t+ 10∆ t, θ).
(7)
The total loss is given by:
L(θ) =L(t+ 5∆ t, θ) +L(t+ 10∆ t, θ). (8)
The spectral regularizer ensures that the high wavenumbers in the Fourier
spectrum of SSH remain consistent with the target Fourier spectrum. This
measure is effective in reducing spectral bias throughout the training process.
The two-time-step loss function enhances the stability horizon of the model.
The number of time steps over which the loss is calculated can potentially be
extended. However, with each increase in the number of time steps, the memory
requirement for the subsequent backpropagation process during training grows
exponentially.
Acknowledgments. We thank Subhashis Hazarika and Maria Molina for
the insightful discussions and Jennifer Warrillow for editorial assistance. MG,
AL, TW, and RH, were supported by NSF awards 2019758 and 2331908. AC
performed partial work at the Palo Alto Research Center, SRI. All authors
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Article Title 15
contributed equally to the research conducted and the writing of the paper.
The codes used in this study are openly available at https://github.com/
magray-ncsu/OceanNet.
References
[1] Pathak, J., Subramanian, S., Harrington, P., Raja, S., Chattopadhyay,
A., Mardani, M., Kurth, T., Hall, D., Li, Z., Azizzadenesheli, K., et
al.: FourCastNet: A global data-driven high-resolution weather model
using adaptive Fourier neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.11214
(2022)
[2] Lam, R., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Willson, M., Wirnsberger, P., Fortunato,
M., Pritzel, A., Ravuri, S., Ewalds, T., Alet, F., Eaton-Rosen, Z., et al.:
Graphcast: Learning skillful medium-range global weather forecasting.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12794 (2022)
[3] Bi, K., Xie, L., Zhang, H., Chen, X., Gu, X., Tian, Q.: Accurate medium-
range global weather forecasting with 3d neural networks. Nature, 1–6
(2023)
[4] Dengo, J.: The problem of gulf stream separation: A barotropic approach.
Journal of Physical oceanography 23(10), 2182–2200 (1993)
[5] Chassignet, E., Marshall, D.: Gulf Stream Separation in Numerical Ocean
Models. American Geophysical Union, ??? (2008)
[6] Ezer, T.: Revisiting the problem of the gulf stream separation: on the rep-
resentation of topography in ocean models with different types of vertical
grids. Ocean Modelling 104, 15–27 (2016)
[7] Spall, M.A.: Dynamics of the gulf stream/deep western boundary cur-
rent crossover. part i: Entrainment and recirculation. Journal of physical
oceanography 26(10), 2152–2168 (1996)
[8] Zhang, R., Vallis, G.K.: The role of bottom vortex stretching on the
path of the north atlantic western boundary current and on the northern
recirculation gyre. Journal of Physical Oceanography 37(8), 2053–2080
(2007)
[9] Hurlburt, H.E., Hogan, P.J.: The gulf stream pathway and the impacts
of the eddy-driven abyssal circulation and the deep western boundary
current. Dynamics of Atmospheres and Oceans 45(3-4), 71–101 (2008)
[10] Schoonover, J., Dewar, W.K., Wienders, N., Deremble, B.: Local sensi-
tivities of the gulf stream separation. Journal of Physical Oceanography
47(2), 353–373 (2017)
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
16 Article Title
[11] Andres, M.: On the recent destabilization of the gulf stream path down-
stream of cape hatteras. Geophysical Research Letters 43(18), 9836–9842
(2016)
[12] Gangopadhyay, A., Gawarkiewicz, G., Silva, E.N.S., Monim, M., Clark,
J.: An observed regime shift in the formation of warm core rings from the
gulf stream. Scientific reports 9(1), 12319 (2019)
[13] Silver, A., Gangopadhyay, A., Gawarkiewicz, G., Fratantoni, P., Clark,
J.: Increased gulf stream warm core ring formations contributes to an
observed increase in salinity maximum intrusions on the northeast shelf.
Scientific Reports 13(1), 1–9 (2023)
[14] Wang, J.L., Zhuang, H., Ch´ erubin, L.M., Ibrahim, A.K., Muhamed Ali,
A.: Medium-term forecasting of loop current eddy cameron and eddy dar-
win formation in the gulf of mexico with a divide-and-conquer machine
learning approach. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 124(8),
5586–5606 (2019)
[15] Agarwal, N., Kondrashov, D., Dueben, P., Ryzhov, E., Berloff, P.: A com-
parison of data-driven approaches to build low-dimensional ocean models.
Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 13(9), 2021–002537
(2021)
[16] Chattopadhyay, A., Nabizadeh, E., Hassanzadeh, P.: Analog forecast-
ing of extreme-causing weather patterns using deep learning. Journal of
Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 12(2), 2019–001958 (2020)
[17] Chattopadhyay, A., Mustafa, M., Hassanzadeh, P., Kashinath, K.: Deep
spatial transformers for autoregressive data-driven forecasting of geophys-
ical turbulence. In: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Climate Informatics, pp. 106–112 (2020)
[18] Chattopadhyay, A., Hassanzadeh, P.: Long-term instabilities of deep
learning-based digital twins of the climate system: The cause and a
solution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07029 (2023)
[19] Dukhovskoy, D.S., Ubnoske, J., Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, E., Hiester,
H.R., Proshutinsky, A.: Skill metrics for evaluation and comparison of sea
ice models. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 120(9), 5910–5931
(2015)
[20] Dalcher, A., Kalnay, E.: Error growth and predictability in operational
ecmwf forecasts. Tellus A 39(5), 474–491 (1987)
[21] DelSole, T.: Predictability and information theory. part i: Measures of
predictability. Journal of the atmospheric sciences 61(20), 2425–2440
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template
Article Title 17
(2004)
[22] Dukhovskoy, D.S., Chassignet, E.P., Bozec, A., Morey, S.L.: Assessment of
predictability of the loop current in the gulf of mexico from observing sys-
tem experiments and observing system simulation experiments. Frontiers
in Marine Science 10, 1153824 (2023)
[23] Weyn, J.A., Durran, D.R., Caruana, R.: Improving data-driven global
weather prediction using deep convolutional neural networks on a cubed
sphere. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 12(9), 2020–
002109 (2020)
[24] Krishnapriyan, A.S., Queiruga, A.F., Erichson, N.B., Mahoney, M.W.:
Learning continuous models for continuous physics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.08494 (2022)
[25] Li, Z., Kovachki, N., Azizzadenesheli, K., Liu, B., Bhattacharya, K., Stu-
art, A., Anandkumar, A.: Fourier neural operator for parametric partial
differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895 (2020)
[26] Xu, Z.-Q.J., Zhang, Y., Luo, T., Xiao, Y., Ma, Z.: Frequency princi-
ple: Fourier analysis sheds light on deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.06523 (2019)
