Towards Optimally Weighted Physics-Informed
Neural Networks in Ocean Modelling
Taco de Wolff, Hugo Carrillo, Luis Martí & Nayat Sánchez-Pi
Inria Chile Research Center
Av. Apoquindo 2827, piso 12, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile
{taco.dewolff,hugo.carrillo,luis.marti,nayat.sanchez-pi}@inria.cl
Abstract
The carbon pump of the world’s ocean plays a vital role in the biosphere and
climate of the earth, urging improved understanding of the functions and inﬂuences
of the ocean for climate change analyses. State-of-the-art techniques are required to
develop models that can capture the complexity of ocean currents and temperature
ﬂows. This work explores the beneﬁts of using physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs) for solving partial differential equations related to ocean modeling; such
as the Burgers, wave, and advection-diffusion equations. We explore the trade-offs
of using data vs. physical models in PINNs for solving partial differential equations.
PINNs account for the deviation from physical laws in order to improve learning
and generalization. We observed how the relative weight between the data and
physical model in the loss function inﬂuence training results, where small data sets
beneﬁt more from the added physics information.
1 Introduction
The ocean plays a key role in the biosphere [ 18]. It regulates the carbon cycle by absorbing emitted
CO 2through the biological pump and dissipates a large part of the heat that is retained in the
atmosphere by the remaining CO 2and other greenhouse gases. The biological pump is driven by
photosynthetic microalgae, herbivores, and decomposing bacteria. Understanding the drivers of
micro- and macroorganisms in the ocean is of paramount importance to understand the functioning of
ecosystems and the efﬁciency of the biological pump in sequestering carbon and thus abating climate
change.
Similarly, there is also a clear scientiﬁc consensus about the effects of climate change on the ocean.
Changes like the shift in temperature, an increase of acidiﬁcation, deoxygenation of water masses,
perturbations in nutrient availability, and biomass productivity to mention a few, have a dramatic
impact on almost all forms of life in the ocean with further consequences on food security, ecosystem
services, and the well-being of coastal communities and humankind in general.
Consequently, we end up with a cyclic dependency: to understand and create strategies to mitigate
climate change it is of primordial importance to understand the ocean and to understand the ocean it is
necessary to understand how climate change is impacting it. Therefore, this is not only an urgent but
also a scientiﬁcally demanding task that must be addressed with a cohort approach involving different
scientiﬁc areas: state-of-the-art artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, applied math, modelling, and
simulation, and of course marine biology and oceanography.
That is why it can be hypothesized that it is necessary to develop new state-of-the-art artiﬁcial
intelligence, machine learning, and mathematical modelling tools that will enable us to move
forward with the understanding of our ocean and to understand, predict, and hopefully mitigate
the consequences of climate change.
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:2106.08747v1  [cs.LG]  16 Jun 2021
The ocean is mostly a ﬂuid in almost permanent movement – subjected to currents, tides, waves and
other interactions – where different where organisms, atmosphere, and continents interact. Modelling
oceanic ﬂuid dynamics is essential but also very expensive in the computational sense. Mathematical
models like the Navier-Stokes equations [ 21] can express most of the processes of interest [ 14].
However, the high computational cost involved in applying them with the correct precision level
makes their application intractable. Machine learning (ML) and, in particular, neural networks are a
competitive alternative. However, these approaches in general require a large amount of data to serve
as examples for the learning process. In oceanographic research, obtaining data is challenging and
expensive. The approach of hybrid models seems to be a good alternative to tackle this problem.
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) [ 16] are a hybrid approach that take into account a
data-based neural network model and a physics-informed mechanistic model, which are two different
paradigms. They offer a framework where existing knowledge about a physical phenomenon and
empirical data gathered about it. This general concept has been previously explored and is known
as data assimilation [ 25], but PINNs bring a novel and sound approach to consolidate the existing
models and sampled data. This feature makes PINNs particularly appealing for the above-described
problems and has lead to some preliminary studies [5, 13].
Furthermore, it could be argued that by incorporating a rule that promotes the consistency of the
neural with a priori existing knowledge, the internal representations created during the training phase
could be easier to understand and interpret by domain experts and, therefore, become not only a
modelling but a research tool with a more broad impact.
This paper deals with the problem of predicting values of physical laws at given points in space and
time relying on PINNs with a focus on ocean modelling. Our main goal is provide a ﬁrst attempt
-to the best of our knowledge- at determining what is the importance and relevance of the physical
component in PINNs in improving the predictive power of a neural network concerning the amount
of data available. By answering this question we aim to ﬁnd a procedure for efﬁcient conﬁguration of
parameters with numerical experiments inferred from the characteristics of the problem and the data
available.
The contributions of this papers are:
1.to study the inﬂuence of the physics information and the scenarios where using it is more
effective,
2.a ﬁrst step towards the automatic parameterization of PINNs using oceanographic modelling
as test case, and
3.we study the effects of other hyperparameters as the length and width of the neural network
and activation functions on the optimal weight.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present a brief rationale regarding
the context of the paper, PINNs, modelling ocean ﬂuids and the particular equations that we want to
address (see 2.1). After that, in Section 3, we deal with the theoretical aspects of our work. Then, in
Section 4, we describe and analyze the experimental studies involving PINNs for the estimation of
the solution and parameters of the PDEs. Finally, in Section 6 we put forward our conclusions of
outline out future work.
2 Foundations
High-dimensional partial differential equations (PDEs) [ 17] are a common ﬁxture in areas as diverse
as physics, chemistry, engineering, ﬁnance, etc. Their enormous success has been hampered by its
limited computational viability. Numerical methods for solving PDEs such as ﬁnite difference or
ﬁnite element methods become infeasible in higher dimensions due to the explosion in the number of
grid points and the demand for reduced time step sizes.
Addressing PDE scalability by approximating them by neural networks has been considered in
various forms either by creating a training data set by directly sampling from an a priori ﬁxed mesh
or by directly sampling the solution in a random manner (see [ 19] for an overview). Consequently, a
database of synthetic data coming from the numerical resolution of PDE-based models is generated
on a broad range of scenarios. These data sets are then used to train and validate deep neural networks
as in [4, 6].
2
These approaches have the limitation of high computational costs for creating such data sets. To
subvert the high computational costs, PINNs were recently proposed by [ 16] as a hybrid approach
that considers a process where a source of physical knowledge in the form of PDEs is available. They
specify the problem of training the neural networks as a multi-objective learning task, where we
want to minimize the error with the data as well as the error with a physical law. Now we have three
problems instead of one: minimizing the error with the data, minimizing the error with the physical
law, and the combination of training for both objectives. [ 16] solves this by incorporating a physics
loss term to the loss function, including a relative weight between both loss terms.
As it is a recent topic, there is not much literature about weighted PINNs. Having optimal weights for
the loss functions in PINNs could help us to improve the performance of deep learning solvers for
PDEs and so make the computations cheaper than regular PINNs. In [ 23], the authors propose optimal
weights for linear PDEs under the knowledge of boundary values and the differential equation. They
use the structure and properties of the PDEs studied.
In [26], the authors propose a self-adaptive loss balanced PINNs (lbPINNs) to solve the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equation by an empirical search of the weights. In [ 24], the authors also chose
empirically the weights to the loss functions in PINNs for study myocardial perfusion in MRI. On the
other hand, in [ 8] the authors evaluate the different results given by a few amount of weights in the
loss functions for the advection-diffusion equation.
In this work, we study the inﬂuence of the weight on a validation quality metric, in particular the
relative error of the neural network solution. In addition, we study the effects of other hyperparameters
as the length and width of the neural network and activation functions on the optimal weight.
2.1 Model equations related to the Ocean
The ocean is characterized by its ﬂuid nature. It is constituted mainly by water in different forms
that is subjected to the effects of waves created by wind, currents, tides, among others. Therefore, in
order to understand the ocean it is necessary to take into account this fundamental characteristic and
to model it and the intervening phenomena. This gains particular relevance with the emergence of the
climate change phenomenon and, therefore, we need trying to model, forecast and device policies to
attempt to mitigate its effects.
Modelling oceanic ﬂuid dynamics is essential but also very expensive in the computational sense.
Mathematical models like the Navier-Stokes equations [ 21] can express most of the processes of
interest. However, the high computational cost involved in applying them with the correct precision
level makes their application intractable.
There are a number of equations that are of particular interest when modelling the ocean that are the
focus of this work. In particular,
•Burgers equation [3]: appears often as a simpliﬁcation to understand the main properties of
the Navier-Stokes equations. It is a one-dimensional equation where the pressure is neglected
but the effects of the nonlinear and viscous terms remain, hence as in the Navier-Stokes
equations a Reynolds number can be deﬁned [ 15]. Hence, it is frequently used as a tool that
is used to understand some of the inside behavior of the general problem.
•Wave equation [20]: in this work we include the wave equation since, under certain suitable
conditions, it can be seen as a reduced model of the shallow-water equation which models
the water height behavior in coasts and channels.
•Advection-diffusion equations [22]: models the behavior of temperature in a ﬂuid, consider-
ing its velocity in the advective term and a diffusion phenomenon of the temperature.
For the sake of briefness, a full description of these equations along with the details about how they
are used in our experiments is given on Section 4.
In this work we study the behavior of the relative error (validation loss) with respect to the weight
in the physical part, for Burgers, wave, and advection-diffusion equations. In [ 8] the authors study
PINNs for advection-difussion equations, also considering different weights. On the other hand, it
is very usual in the literature to ﬁnd only the use of boundary and initial conditions as data, while a
large amount of interior data is considered for data driven discovery of PDEs.
3
Neural network Physics informationx
y
t......^u
^vI
@=@x
@=@y
@2=@x2
etc.f`data(u;^u;v;^v)
`physics (f)
`= (1 )`data+`physics
Figure 1: Schematic representation of a physics-informed neural network with inputs x,y, andt;
outputs ^uand^v. In this work we applied metaheuristics for determining the optimal hyperparameters
for each case. Using automatic gradient calculation we can differentiate the neural network by its
input variables and construct a physics error function f. The loss function involves a loss term for the
data and a loss term for the physics function.
In this work we consider a small amount of scattered data from the whole closed cylinder where the
spatiotemporal PDEs are deﬁned, which can simulate more likely the acquisition of sparse data in a
huge domain.
3 Method
As stated, our main goal is to understand the viability and particularities of the use of PINNs for
oceanographic modelling. One particularity of this type of problem is the scarcity of data, specially if
contrasted for the data-hungry needs of deep learning models that are currently the state of the art.
That is why it is so important to understand the value that the physics information term can bring in
order to “ﬁll the gaps” where data is scarce or not available.
We also hypothesize that, even in cases where there is a sufﬁcient amount of data, adding a physics-
informed loss function can potentially lead to a better interpretability of the trained model. This term
can be seen as regularization term that would prompt the network to create representations that are
consistent with the current knowledge of the phenomena. This, then should allow in the future to
have an easier interpretation, assimilation, validation and acceptance by domain experts.
PINNs are neural network models that are trained to obey laws in physics described by partial
differential equations (PDEs). They can be used used to solve supervised tasks in which we both
minimize the error with respect to the data and to the physics law. We deﬁne the loss function as
follows
`= (1 )`data+`physics (1)
where`datais the loss with respect to the data, `physics is the loss with respect to the PDEs of a physics
law, and2[0;1]is the relative weight of the physics loss. If fjis the error of each physical
condition, then using the mean-squared error for both losses we obtain
`= (1 )Nu 1X
i=0(yi ^yi)2+X
jNf 1X
i=0(fj
i)2: (2)
Any neural network such as fully connected, recurrent, and convolutional networks can be used,
where we make use of automatic gradient calculations as used by back-propagation to compute
derivatives of the output variables with respect to the input variables. An example of such a network
is shown in Fig. 1, with frepresenting the PDE rewritten as f= 0.
The network is designed with input variables x,y, andtand output variables ^uand^v. The output
variables are used directly to calculate the data loss term, while for the physics loss term we
4
differentiate the variables with respect to the input variables as needed for the physics loss function.
Observe that the neural network must have input variables that correspond to the physics law’s
derivative terms. That is, if @u=@xis part of our physics loss function, then xmust be an input variable
anduan output variable of our neural network.
The objective is to train both in a supervisory manner with measured or simulated data (i. e. `data),
as well as training to minimize the departure from the physics law. The `physics term ensures that
the neural network generalizes better for unseen data by preventing overﬁtting. The physics loss
encourages that the output variables are not just trained to a local region around the input values of
the given data, but that also their ﬁrst and/or second-degree derivations (depending on the PDEs)
match with our physical understanding of the model thus spurring better predictive power outside the
region of the training data.
We denote NlMlas a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) of Nlhidden layers and Mlneurons per layer.
As part of the experimentation we assess different activation functions. As our optimization problem
is non-convex, the stochastic gradient-descent Adam optimizer was used [ 10] with different learning
rates depending on the problem. The weights of the neural network are initialized randomly using
Xavier’s initialization method [ 7]. As we intend to analyze how activation functions play a role in
learning the derivations of PDEs the tanh , GELU, Softplus, LogSigmoid, Sigmoid, TanhShrink,
CELU, Softsign, and ReLU activation functions.
We select a sample subset (Xi;Yi)8i2[0;Nu 1]at random from the entire solution space for
training the data loss, with Xi2RDtheDfeatures and Yi2RPthe labels of dimension P. For the
physics loss we select a subset Xi8i2[0;Nf 1]at random for which we evaluate the PDE error.
Note that for the physics loss the solution is not needed, allowing applications to be able to train even
when few data are available of the solution. In general we pick NuNf.
4 Experiments
As stated in Section 2, we consider three models: the ﬁrst ones, the Burgers equation, is a nonlinear
one-dimensional and the other two, wave, and advection-diffusion equations, are linear and two
dimensional PDEs.
4.1 Datasets preparation
In order to generate data for training, validation, and testing, we simulate the PDEs using a Fourier
spectral method for the one dimensional model, ﬁnite element methods (FEM) for the wave equation
and the explicit analytical solution for the advection-diffusion equation. Simulations for the two-
dimensional problems were performed using FEniCS [1].
Burgers equation We consider the following Burgers equation
@u
@t+u@u
@x=@2u
@x2; (3)
whereis a diffusion coefﬁcient. This equation usually appears in the context of ﬂuid mechanics, and
more speciﬁcally models one-dimensional internal waves in deep ocean. It represents a hyperbolic
conservation law as !0and it is the simplest model for analyzing the effect of nonlinear advection
and diffusion in a combined way. Notice that the Burgers equation can be written as a physics loss
term of (2) as fBurgers [u] = 0:
We simulated the Burgers equation in the spatiotemporal domain [0;L][0;T], using a Fourier
spectral method as described in [2].
The diffusion coefﬁcient is taken as =0:01

.
We consider the initial condition
u(x;0) = sin(x);withx2( 1;1); (4)
and boundary conditions
u(1;t) =u( 1;t) = 0;witht2(0;1); (5)
5
withN= 512 spatial points in a uniform grid in [ 1;1]and100points in time deﬁned in a uniform
grid in [0;1].
Wave equation In this case, we consider the wave equation
@2
@t2 r (Hr) = 0; (6)
where:
R+
0!Rrepresents the superﬁcial ﬂuctuations of a water container or channel and
H:
!R+
0is the depth of the water from a reference level. This equation can be written as
fwaves[;H] = 0 . This is where the physics loss is taken from for this PDE.
We simulate the wave equation in a rectangular domain in the time interval ]0;Tf[, with Dirichlet
boundary conditions for as
= 0;on@
]0;Tf[; (7)
and initial conditions on 
(x;y;0) = exp 
 10 
(x 0:5)2+ (y 0:75)2
;
@
@t(x;y;0) = 0:(8)
On the other hand, the depth His given by
H(x;y) = (1 x)(2 sin(3y))in
: (9)
We implement FEM in this equation considering Lagrange ﬁnite elements of degree 1. The time
scheme is explicit and Tf= 1:0,n= 100 .
Advection-diffusion equation We consider the advection-diffusion equation for heat transfer,
assuming that the diffusion coefﬁcient is constant, there are no sources nor sinks of heat, and the
temperature depends only on x,y, andt, that is,
@T
@t=Dr2T urT; (10)
whereT:
R+
0!Ris the temperature in K,D= 0:1m2
sis the thermal diffusivity considered in
this work, and u:
R+
0!R2the velocity ﬁeld inm
s. The equation can be written as a physics
loss term as
fAD[u;v;T ] = 0: (11)
We simulate the advection-diffusion equation in 
(0;Tf)where 
 = (0;Lx)(0;Ly), where
Lx=Ly= 1:0andTf= 1:0. In addition, D= 0:02,u= (cos()andv= sin()), where
= 22:5. We consider the following initial conditions
T(x;y;0) = exp
 x2+y2
D
;in
; (12)
and boundary condition
T(x;y;t ) =1
4t+ 1exp
 x2+y2+t2(u2+v2) 2t(xu+yv)
D(4t+ 1)
on@
: (13)
As the coefﬁcients are constant and the domain is a square, we are able to solve this linear equation
by known analytic methods. The explicit solution of this equation is
T(x;y;t ) =1
4t+ 1exp
 x2+y2+t2(u2+v2) 2t(xu+yv)
D(4t+ 1)
; (14)
so we generate this solution in a uniform unit square mesh with 40 points in each spatial dimension.
6
103
102
101
100Validation lossBurgers Nu=500
 AdvDif Nu=2500
103
102
101
100Waves Nu=500
103
102
101
100Validation lossBurgers Nu=200
 AdvDif Nu=500
103
102
101
100Waves Nu=200
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Lambda103
102
101
100Validation lossBurgers Nu=100
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
LambdaAdvDif Nu=100
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Lambda103
102
101
100Waves Nu=100Figure 2: The relative error for different values of Nuand for different problems. Each dot represents
the ﬁnal value of the relative error after training. We observe how the choice of affects training
results, and we observe a slight shift to higher values asNudecreases. The dashed lines were
added manually to aid in observing trends. For Burgers we note that the minimum shifts towards 1:0
asNudecreases, and for advection-diffusion the slope becomes more negative as Nudecreases. The
wave equation is more less evident, but it can be seen that for Nu= 500 andNu= 200 the minimum
lies around zero, while for Nu= 100 the trend has ﬂattened and the results would be similar for
2[0:1;0:9]roughly.
5 Results and discussion
See Table 1 for an overview of the used parameters for each of the models. The hyperparameters,
such as the number and size of the hidden layers; the optimizer; and the number of epochs, were
chosen either manually or by a grid search. All experiments were executed using Google Colab, a
platform to run notebooks on fast graphics processing units (GPUs). The ability of GPUs to run
calculations in parallel greatly enhances the speed of evaluating the neural network and calculating
the gradients.1
1The data sets, source code, and results are available online at https://github.com/Inria-Chile/
assessing-pinns-ocean-modelling and are released under the CeCILL license.
7
Table 1: Parameters for each of the models. Here epochs are the numbers of iterations over the
training set, and NuandNfare the number of points used for the data loss and the physics loss
respectively. Nval
uis the number of data points used to for the validation data loss.
Model NN setup Optimizer Epochs NuNfNval
u
Burgers 820 Adam (lr=0.001) 25000 100, 200, 500 12800 25600
Advec.-Diffusion 340 Adam (lr=0.002) 20000 100, 500, 2500 5000 168100
Wave 550 Adam (lr=0.001) 10000 100, 200, 500 10000 21800
Burgers AdvDif Waves
Model0.000.020.040.060.080.100.12Relative errorWith physics loss
Without physics loss
(a) Errors with/without physics loss.
tanh GELU Softplus LogSigmoid Sigmoid TanhShrink CELU Softsign ReLU
Activation function102
101
Relative error
Burgers
AdvDif
Waves (b) Relative error using different activation functions.
Figure 3: Summary of the experimental results. Fig. 3a shows results for 25 runs with and without
physics loss for each of the models. For Fig. 3b, Nuis200,500, and 200andis0:1,0:5, and 0:002
for the Burgers, advection-diffusion, and wave equations respectively.
To be able to compare the performance between models, the validation data loss is calculated over
the entire data set and then normalized as
Relative Error =q
MSE(Yval;^Yval)
kYvalk2; (15)
whereYvalare the labels of the validation data set, ^Yvalthe output of the neural network, and MSE
the mean squared error. In the case of advection-diffusion the labels Yihave been normalized to have
zero mean and unit standard deviation to bring down the scale of the temperature, which is in Kelvin,
to a range around zero. This obviates the need for the division when calculating the relative error.
Additionally, to reduce the jitter in the loss while training, we use the lowest validation data loss of
the last 250 epochs to calculate the relative error.
Learning the optimal value of , the relative weighting of the physics loss with respect to the data
loss is a metalearning objective in order to improve subsequent training of the same PINN. In Fig. 2
we show the results of evaluating different problems using different values for Nuto ﬁnd an optimal
value of. A sharp rise in the relative error can be observed at = 0:0and= 1:0, which are
equivalent to training using solely the data loss or physics loss terms respectively. We note that the
optimal value for depends on the problem at hand and speciﬁcally on the scale of the data loss
versus the physics loss. Normalizing the data set labels would in part solve the problem, but the scale
of the physics loss remains hard to normalize. In our experiments however, we note that for typical
values ofthe comparison of the data and physics loss remains roughly 0:1<` data=`physics<10.
Per problem we observe that at decreasing values for Nu, the optimal value of shifts slightly
towards 1:0. This trend suggests that as data become more sparse, the physics loss takes higher
importance. As less data are available, the information input from the physics loss helps training
signiﬁcantly, while the reverse holds as more data are available. At the limit where Nuis sufﬁciently
large to be able to train the network autonomously, the optimal value of tends to zero.
In cases where few data points are known (i.e. Nuis small), the choice of the sample subset can
have a large inﬂuence on training results. In Fig. 3a the relative error is shown for 25 random data
subset selections with and without the physics loss. The added physics loss term reduces the relative
8
error, averaged over all three models, by 65% and reduces its standard deviation by 56%. PINNs thus
improve training results and reduce variability when the number of data points is low.
An analysis of how activation functions play a role in learning the derivations of PDEs, a comparison
is made with nine activation functions in Fig. 3b. Here we compare the tanh , GELU, Softplus,
LogSigmoid, Sigmoid, TanhShrink, CELU, Softsign, ReLU activation function for their performance.
It can be observed that especially the tanh and GELU activation functions and to a lesser extend
Softplus work well. The ReLU function produces poor results due to its inability to learn second
or higher derivatives. Due to the fact that a DNN using the ReLU activation function produces a
piece-wise linear function [ 12], its second derivative is zero except at the points where the linear
segments meet, where it will be a Dirac function at x= 0, inhibiting learning second derivatives
or higher. The Softsign and CELU functions have similar problems given their discontinuity of the
second derivative at x= 0.
6 Final remarks
Information from the PDE serves in cases where data availability is limited to the extent that it would
either be unable to train the network satisfactorily using solely the data, or where results would vary
widely depending on the selection of the data points. The addition of the physics loss term both
improves training results and improves the stability of the training, even more so when the weight in
the loss function is optimal.
Finding the optimal weight of the loss function is a complex problem and this is, to the best of our
knowledge, the ﬁrst study to understand the behavior of it with respect to different hyperparameters
and PDEs. In the future, we expect to ﬁnd the optimal weights using only the data available. In
addition, it is also the ﬁrst attempt at the study of PINNs for ocean modelling equations with very
simpliﬁed geometries. We expect to extend our results to more complex and realistic geometries in
order to use our results in real applications.
Ashas a dual role: the prior conﬁdence in the training data vs. the PDE and the scaling of these
two terms, future work could understand each role of this parameter, which could be a possible
explanation of why the optimal weight in some of our experiments are so different between different
models. In addition, as we observed for very small data sets, it would be interesting to ﬁnd what
“good” sample subsets of the problem for training are more stable under optimization. This would be
the ﬁrst step to estimate the minimal amount of data required to train the neural networks in a robust
way.
As the equations of interest are inherently wave-like, we propose to explore the beneﬁts of Fourier
transformations for learning the equations more effectively, as was done by [ 11]. This would enable
the network to learn patterns of the data in the frequency space. Additionally, to generalize the model
better for unseen data, we propose the use of dropout by [ 9] to randomly turn off a percentage of
the neurons. This forces the network to learn redundancies in case certain neurons are turned off,
increasing the stability of the network, and the likelihood to generalize better for unseen data.
Future work on this topic is needed as it is required to develop better models for understanding the
ocean and integrate those models with others that explain the interaction between organisms and the
environment. This is essential because of the constantly changing nature of the ocean.
We believe that PINNs have the potential of providing such tools, and therefore, serve as a building
block of a more comprehensive solution that addresses the ultimate issue of understanding and
mitigating the climate change crisis. However, this potential also comes with important risks as using
an inadequate, biased, or non-transparent tool could lead instead to a deterioration. In this direction,
as we already mentioned in the paper, we are interested in combining PINNs with explainable AI and
powerful visualization tools. Similarly, extended validation is necessary by domain experts.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work is funded by project CORFO 10CEII-9157 Inria Chile and Inria Challenge project OcéanIA
(desc. num 14500).
9
References
[1]Alnæs, M. S., Blechta, J., Hake, J., Johansson, A., Kehlet, B., Logg, A., Richardson, C., Ring, J.,
Rognes, M. E., and Wells, G. N. (2015). The FEniCS project version 1.5. Archive of Numerical
Software , 3(100).
[2]Basdevant, C., Deville, M., Haldenwang, P., Lacroix, J., Ouazzani, J., Peyret, R., Orlandi, P., and
Patera, A. (1986). Spectral and ﬁnite difference solutions of the burgers equation. Computers &
ﬂuids , 14(1):23–41.
[3]Burgers, J. (1948). A mathematical model illustrating the theory of turbulence. In V on Mises, R.
and V on Kármán, T., editors, Advances in Applied Mechanics , volume 1, pages 171–199. Elsevier.
[4]Chen, R. T., Rubanova, Y ., Bettencourt, J., and Duvenaud, D. K. (2018). Neural ordinary
differential equations. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 6571–6583.
[5]de Wolff, T., Carrillo Lincopi, H., Martí, L., and Sanchez-Pi, N. (2021). Assessing physics
informed neural networks in ocean modelling and climate change applications. In Sanchez-Pi, N.
and Martí, L., editors, AI: Modeling Oceans and Climate Change Workshop at ICLR 2021 .
[6]Dupont, E., Doucet, A., and Teh, Y . W. (2019). Augmented neural ODEs. In Wallach, H.,
Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d 'Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R., editors, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 32 , pages 3140–3150. Curran Associates, Inc.
[7]Glorot, X. and Bengio, Y . (2010). Understanding the difﬁculty of training deep feedforward
neural networks. In Teh, Y . W. and Titterington, M., editors, Proceedings of the Thirteenth
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , volume 9 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research , pages 249–256, Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy. PMLR.
[8]He, Q. and Tartakovsky, A. M. (2020). Physics-informed neural network method for forward and
backward advection-dispersion equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.11658 .
[9]Hinton, G. E., Srivastava, N., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Salakhutdinov, R. (2012).
Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors. CoRR , abs/1207.0580.
[10] Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2017). ADAM: A method for stochastic optimization.
[11] Li, Z., Kovachki, N., Azizzadenesheli, K., Liu, B., Bhattacharya, K., Stuart, A., and Anandku-
mar, A. (2020). Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations.
[12] Liu, B. and Liang, Y . (2021). Optimal function approximation with ReLU neural networks.
Neurocomputing , 435:216–227.
[13] Lütjens, B., Crawford, C. H., Veillette, M., and Newman, D. (2021). PCE-PINNs: Physics-
informed neural networks for uncertainty propagation in ocean modeling. In Sanchez-Pi, N. and
Martí, L., editors, AI: Modeling Oceans and Climate Change Workshop at ICLR 2021 .
[14] McLean, D. (2012). Understanding aerodynamics: arguing from the real physics . John Wiley
& Sons.
[15] Orlandi, P. (2000). The Burgers equation , pages 40–50. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht.
[16] Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., and Karniadakis, G. (2019). Physics-informed neural networks: A
deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 378:686–707.
[17] Rao, K. S. (2010). Introduction to partial differential equations . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.
[18] Sánchez-Pi, N., Martí, L., Abreu, A., Bernard, O., de Vargas, C., Eveillard, D., Maass, A.,
Marquet, P. A., Sainte-Marie, J., Salomon, J., Schoenauer, M., and Sebag, M. (2020). Artiﬁcial
intelligence, machine learning and modeling for understanding the oceans and climate change.
In Dao, D., Sherwin, E., Donti, P., Kaack, L., Kuntz, L., Yusuf, Y ., Rolnick, D., Nakalembe,
C., Monteleoni, C., and Bengio, Y ., editors, Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning
workshop at NeurIPS 2020 .
10
[19] Sirignano, J. and Spiliopoulos, K. (2018). DGM: A deep learning algorithm for solving partial
differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 375:339–1364.
[20] Stoker, J. J. (2011). Water waves: The mathematical theory with applications , volume 36. John
Wiley & Sons.
[21] Temam, R. (2001). Navier-Stokes equations: Theory and numerical analysis , volume 343.
American Mathematical Soc.
[22] Union, J. I. G. (2013). Advection diffusion equation models in near-surface geophysical and
environmental sciences. J. Ind. Geophys. Union (April 2013) , 17(2):117–127.
[23] van der Meer, R., Oosterlee, C., and Borovykh, A. (2020). Optimally weighted loss functions
for solving PDEs with neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06269 .
[24] van Herten, R. L., Chiribiri, A., Breeuwer, M., Veta, M., and Scannell, C. M. (2020).
Physics-informed neural networks for myocardial perfusion mri quantiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.12844 .
[25] Vetra-Carvalho, S., van Leeuwen, P. J., Nerger, L., Barth, A., Altaf, M. U., Brasseur, P.,
Kirchgessner, P., and Beckers, J.-M. (2018). State-of-the-art stochastic data assimilation methods
for high-dimensional non-Gaussian problems. Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography ,
70(1):1–43.
[26] Xiang, Z., Peng, W., Zheng, X., Zhao, X., and Yao, W. (2021). Self-adaptive loss balanced
physics-informed neural networks for the incompressible navier-stokes equations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.06217 .
Checklist
1. For all authors...
(a)Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reﬂect the paper’s
contributions and scope? [Yes]
(b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes]
(c)Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [Yes] See in
particular Section 6
(d)Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
them? [Yes]
2. If you are including theoretical results...
(a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [Yes]
(b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [N/A]
3. If you ran experiments...
(a)Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experi-
mental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes] See Section 5.
(b)Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
were chosen)? [Yes] See Section 5.
(c)Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
ments multiple times)? [Yes] See Section 5.
(d)Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes] See Section 5.
4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
(a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [N/A]
(b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [Yes] See Section 5.
(c)Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [Yes]
See Section 5.
(d)Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
using/curating? [N/A]
11
(e)Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identiﬁable
information or offensive content? [N/A]
5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
(a)Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
applicable? [N/A]
(b)Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [N/A]
(c)Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
spent on participant compensation? [N/A]
12
